Activation Function
To allow Neural Networks to learn complex decision boundaries, we apply a nonlinear activation function to some of its layers. Commonly used functions include sigmoid, tanh, ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) and variants of these.


Adadelta
Adadelta is a gradient descent based learning algorithm that adapts the learning rate per parameter over time. It was proposed as an improvement over Adagrad, which is more sensitive to hyperparameters and may decrease the learning rate too aggressively. Adadelta It is similar to rmsprop and can be used instead of vanilla SGD.

ADADELTA: An Adaptive Learning Rate Method
Stanford CS231n: Optimization Algorithms
An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms

Adagrad
Adagrad is an adaptive learning rate algorithms that keeps track of the squared gradients over time and automatically adapts the learning rate per-parameter. It can be used instead of vanilla SGD and is particularly helpful for sparse data, where it assigns a higher learning rate to infrequently updated parameters.

Adaptive Subgradient Methods for Online Learning and Stochastic Optimization
Stanford CS231n: Optimization Algorithms
An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms

Adam
Adam is an adaptive learning rate algorithm similar to rmsprop, but updates are
directly estimated using a running average of the first and second moment of the gradient and also include a bias correction term.

Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization
An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms

Affine Layer
A fully-connected layer in a Neural Network. Affine means that each neuron in the previous layer is connected to each neuron in the current layer. In many ways, this is the “standard” layer of a Neural Network. Affine layers are often added on top of the outputs of Convolutional Neural Networks or Recurrent Neural Networks before making a final prediction. An affine layer is typically of the form y = f(Wx + b) where x are the layer inputs, W the parameters, b a bias vector, and f a nonlinear activation function


Attention Mechanism
Attention Mechanisms are inspired by human visual attention, the ability to focus on specific parts of an image. Attention mechanisms can be incorporated in both Language Processing and Image Recognition architectures to help the network learn what to “focus” on when making predictions.

Attention and Memory in Deep Learning and NLP

Alexnet
Alexnet is the name of the Convolutional Neural Network architecture that won the ILSVRC 2012 competition by a large margin and was responsible for a resurgence of interest in CNNs for Image Recognition. It consists of five convolutional layers, some of which are followed by max-pooling layers, and three fully-connected layers with a final 1000-way softmax. Alexnet was introduced in ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks.


Autoencoder
An Autoencoder is a Neural Network model whose goal is to predict the input itself, typically through a “bottleneck” somewhere in the network. By introducing a bottleneck, we force the network to learn a lower-dimensional representation of the input, effectively compressing the input into a good representation. Autoencoders are related to PCA and other dimensionality reduction techniques, but can learn more complex mappings due to their nonlinear nature. A wide range of autoencoder architectures exist, including Denoising Autoencoders, Variational Autoencoders, or Sequence Autoencoders.


Average-Pooling
Average-Pooling is a pooling technique used in Convolutional Neural Networks for Image Recognition. It works by sliding a window over patches of features, such as pixels, and taking the average of all values within the window. It compresses the input representation into a lower-dimensional representation.


Backpropagation
Backpropagation is an algorithm to efficiently calculate the gradients in a Neural Network, or more generally, a feedforward computational graph. It boils down to applying the chain rule of differentiation starting from the network output and propagating the gradients backward. The first uses of backpropagation go back to Vapnik in the 1960’s, but Learning representations by back-propagating errors is often cited as the source.

Calculus on Computational Graphs: Backpropagation

Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT)
Backpropagation Through Time (paper) is the Backpropagation algorithm applied to Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). BPTT can be seen as the standard backpropagation algorithm applied to an RNN, where each time step represents a layer and the parameters are shared across layers. Because an RNN shares the same parameters across all time steps, the errors at one time step must be backpropagated “through time” to all previous time steps, hence the name. When dealing with long sequences (hundreds of inputs), a truncated version of BPTT is often used to reduce the computational cost. Truncated BPTT stops backpropagating the errors after a fixed number of steps.

Backpropagation Through Time: What It Does and How to Do It

Batch Normalization
Batch Normalization is a technique that normalizes layer inputs per mini-batch. It speed up training, allows for the usage of higher learner rates, and can act as a regularizer. Batch Normalization has been found to be very effective for Convolutional and Feedforward Neural Networks but hasn’t been successfully applied to Recurrent Neural Networks.

Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift
Batch Normalized Recurrent Neural Networks

Bidirectional RNN
A Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network is a type of Neural Network that contains two RNNs going into different directions. The forward RNN reads the input sequence from start to end, while the backward RNN reads it from end to start. The two RNNs are stacked on top of each others and their states are typically combined by appending the two vectors. Bidirectional RNNs are often used in Natural Language problems, where we want to take the context from both before and after a word into account before making a prediction.

Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Networks

Caffe
Caffe is a deep learning framework developed by the Berkeley Vision and Learning Center. Caffe is particularly popular and performant for vision tasks and CNN models.


Categorical Cross-Entropy Loss
The categorical cross-entropy loss is also known as the negative log likelihood. It is a popular loss function for categorization problems and measures the similarity between two probability distributions, typically the true labels and the predicted labels. It is given by L = -sum(y * log(y_prediction)) where y is the probability distribution of true labels (typically a one-hot vector) and y_prediction is the probability distribution of the predicted labels, often coming from a softmax.


Channel
Input data to Deep Learning models can have multiple channels. The canonical examples are images, which have red, green and blue color channels. A image can be represented as a 3-dimensional Tensor with the dimensions corresponding to channel, height, and width. Natural Language data can also have multiple channels, in the form of different types of embeddings for example.


Convolutional Neural Network (CNN, ConvNet)
A CNN uses convolutions to connected extract features from local regions of an input. Most CNNs contain a combination of convolutional, pooling and affine layers. CNNs have gained popularity particularly through their excellent performance on visual recognition tasks, where they have been setting the state of the art for several years.

Stanford CS231n class – Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual Recognition
Understanding Convolutional Neural Networks for NLP

Deep Belief Network (DBN)
DBNs are a type of probabilistic graphical model that learn a hierarchical representation of the data in an unsupervised manner. DBNs consist of multiple hidden layers with connections between neurons in each successive pair of layers. DBNs are built by stacking multiple RBNs on top of each other and training them one by one.

A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets

Deep Dream
A technique invented by Google that tries to distill the knowledge captured by a deep Convolutional Neural Network. The technique can generate new images, or transform existing images and give them a dreamlike flavor, especially when applied recursively.

Deep Dream on Github
Inceptionism: Going Deeper into Neural Networks

Dropout
Dropout is a regularization technique for Neural Networks that prevents overfitting. It prevents neurons from co-adapting by randomly setting a fraction of them to 0 at each training iteration. Dropout can be interpreted in various ways, such as randomly sampling from an exponential number of different networks. Dropout layers first gained popularity through their use in CNNs, but have since been applied to other layers, including input embeddings or recurrent networks.

Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from Overfitting
Recurrent Neural Network Regularization

Embedding
An embedding maps an input representation, such as a word or sentence, into a vector. A popular type of embedding are word embeddings such as word2vec or GloVe. We can also embed sentences, paragraphs or images. For example, by mapping images and their textual descriptions into a common embedding space and minimizing the distance between them, we can match labels with images. Embeddings can be learned explicitly, such as in word2vec, or as part of a supervised task, such as Sentiment Analysis. Often, the input layer of a network is initialized with pre-trained embeddings, which are then fine-tuned to the task at hand.


Exploding Gradient Problem
The Exploding Gradient Problem is the opposite of the Vanishing Gradient Problem. In Deep Neural Networks gradients may explode during backpropagation, resulting number overflows. A common technique to deal with exploding gradients is to perform Gradient Clipping.

On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks

Fine-Tuning
Fine-Tuning refers to the technique of initializing a network with parameters from another task (such as an unsupervised training task), and then updating these parameters based on the task at hand. For example, NLP architecture often use pre-trained word embeddings like word2vec, and these word embeddings are then updated during training based for a specific task like Sentiment Analysis.


Gradient Clipping
Gradient Clipping is a technique to prevent exploding gradients in very deep networks, typically Recurrent Neural Networks. There exist various ways to perform gradient clipping, but the a common one is to normalize the gradients of a parameter vector when its L2 norm exceeds a certain threshold according to new_gradients = gradients * threshold / l2_norm(gradients).

On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks

GloVe
GloVe is an unsupervised learning algorithm for obtaining vector representations (embeddings) for words. GloVe vectors serve the same purpose as word2vec but have different vector representations due to being trained on co-occurrence statistics.

GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation

GoogleLeNet
The name of the Convolutional Neural Network architecture that won the ILSVRC 2014 challenge. The network uses Inception modules to reduce the parameters and improve the utilization of the computing resources inside the network.

Going Deeper with Convolutions

GRU
The Gated Recurrent Unit is a simplified version of an LSTM unit with fewer parameters. Just like an LSTM cell, it uses a gating mechanism to allow RNNs to efficiently learn long-range dependency by preventing the vanishing gradient problem. The GRU consists of a reset and update gate that determine which part of the old memory to keep vs. update with new values at the current time step.

Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder-Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation
Recurrent Neural Network Tutorial, Part 4 – Implementing a GRU/LSTM RNN with Python and Theano

Highway Layer
A Highway Layer (paper) is a type of Neural Network layer that uses a gating mechanism to control the information flow through a layer. Stacking multiple Highway Layers allows for training of very deep networks. Highway Layers work by learning a gating function that chooses which parts of the inputs to pass through and which parts to pass through a transformation function, such as a standard affine layer for example. The basic formulation of a Highway Layer is T * h(x) + (1 - T) * x, where T is the learned gating function with values between 0 and 1, h(x) is an arbitrary input transformation and x is the input. Note that all of these must have the same size.


ICML
The International Conference for Machine Learning, a top-tier machine learning conference.


ILSVRC
The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge evaluates algorithms for object detection and image classification at large scale. It is the most popular academic challenge in computer vision. Over the past years, Deep Learning techniques have led to a significant reduction in error rates, from 30% to less than 5%, beating human performance on several classification tasks.


Inception Module
Inception Modules are used in Convolutional Neural Networks to allow for more efficient computation and deeper Networks trough a dimensionality reduction with stacked 1×1 convolutions.

Going Deeper with Convolutions

Keras
Kears is a Python-based Deep Learning library that includes many high-level building blocks for deep Neural Networks. It can run on top of either TensorFlow, Theano, or CNTK.


LSTM
Long Short-Term Memory networks were invented to prevent the vanishing gradient problem in Recurrent Neural Networks by using a memory gating mechanism. Using LSTM units to calculate the hidden state in an RNN we help to the network to efficiently propagate gradients and learn long-range dependencies.

Long Short-Term Memory
Understanding LSTM Networks
Recurrent Neural Network Tutorial, Part 4 – Implementing a GRU/LSTM RNN with Python and Theano

Max-Pooling
A pooling operations typically used in Convolutional Neural Networks. A max-pooling layer selects the maximum value from a patch of features. Just like a convolutional layer, pooling layers are parameterized by a window (patch) size and stride size. For example, we may slide a window of size 2×2 over a 10×10 feature matrix using stride size 2, selecting the max across all 4 values within each window, resulting in a new 5×5 feature matrix. Pooling layers help to reduce the dimensionality of a representation by keeping only the most salient information, and in the case of image inputs, they provide basic invariance to translation (the same maximum values will be selected even if the image is shifted by a few pixels). Pooling layers are typically inserted between successive convolutional layers.


MNIST
The MNIST data set is the perhaps most commonly used Image Recognition dataset. It consists of 60,000 training and 10,000 test examples of handwritten digits. Each image is 28×28 pixels large. State of the art models typically achieve accuracies of 99.5% or higher on the test set.


Momentum
Momentum is an extension to the Gradient Descent Algorithm that accelerates or damps the parameter updates. In practice, including a momentum term in the gradient descent updates leads to better convergence rates in Deep Networks.

Learning representations by back-propagating errors

Multilayer Perceptron (MLP(
A Multilayer Perceptron is a Feedforward Neural Network with multiple fully-connected layers that use nonlinear activation functions to deal with data which is not linearly separable. An MLP is the most basic form of a multilayer Neural Network, or a deep Neural Networks if it has more than 2 layers.


Negative Log Likelihood (NLL)
See Categorical Cross Entropy Loss.


Neural Machine Translation (NMT)
An NMT system uses Neural Networks to translate between languages, such as English and French. NMT systems can be trained end-to-end using bilingual corpora, which differs from traditional Machine Translation systems that require hand-crafted features and engineering. NMT systems are typically implemented using encoder and decoder recurrent neural networks that encode a source sentence and produce a target sentence, respectively.

Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks
Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder-Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation

Neural Turing Machine (NTM)
NMTs are Neural Network architectures that can infer simple algorithms from examples. For example, a NTM may learn a sorting algorithm through example inputs and outputs. NTMs typically learn some form of memory and attention mechanism to deal with state during program execution.

Neural Turing Machines

Nonlinearity
See Activation Function.


Noise-contrastive estimation (NCE)
Noise-contrastive estimation is a sampling loss typically used to train classifiers with a large output vocabulary. Calculating the softmax over a large number of possible classes is prohibitively expensive. Using NCE, we can reduce the problem to binary classification problem by training the classifier to discriminate between samples from the “real” distribution and an artificially generated noise distribution.

Noise-contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle for unnormalized statistical models
Learning word embeddings efficiently with noise-contrastive estimation

Pooling
See Max-Pooling or Average-Pooling.


Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBN)
RBMs are a type of probabilistic graphical model that can be interpreted as a stochastic artificial neural network. RBNs learn a representation of the data in an unsupervised manner. An RBN consists of visible and hidden layer, and connections between binary neurons in each of these layers. RBNs can be efficiently trained using Contrastive Divergence, an approximation of gradient descent.

Chapter 6: Information Processing in Dynamical Systems: Foundations of Harmony Theory
An Introduction to Restricted Boltzmann Machines

Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
A RNN models sequential interactions through a hidden state, or memory. It can take up to N inputs and produce up to N outputs. For example, an input sequence may be a sentence with the outputs being the part-of-speech tag for each word (N-to-N). An input could be a sentence, and the output a sentiment classification of the sentence (N-to-1). An input could be a single image, and the output could be a sequence of words corresponding to the description of an image (1-to-N). At each time step, an RNN calculates a new hidden state (“memory”) based on the current input and the previous hidden state. The “recurrent” stems from the facts that at each step the same parameters are used and the network performs the same calculations based on different inputs.

Understanding LSTM Networks
Recurrent Neural Networks Tutorial, Part 1 – Introduction to RNNs

Recursive Neural Network
Recursive Neural Networks are a generalization of Recurrent Neural Networks to a tree-like structure. The same weights are applied at each recursion. Just like RNNs, Recursive Neural Networks can be trained end-to-end using backpropagation. While it is possible to learn the tree structure as part of the optimization problem, Recursive Neural Networks are often applied to problem that already have a predefined structure, like a parse tree in Natural Language Processing.

Parsing Natural Scenes and Natural Language with Recursive Neural Networks

ReLU
Short for Rectified Linear Unit(s). ReLUs are often used as activation functions in Deep Neural Networks. They are defined by f(x) = max(0, x). The advantages of ReLUs over functions like tanh include that they tend to be sparse (their activation easily be set to 0), and that they suffer less from the vanishing gradient problem. ReLUs are the most commonly used activation function in Convolutional Neural Networks. There exist several variations of ReLUs, such as Leaky ReLUs, Parametric ReLU (PReLU) or a smoother softplus approximation.

Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level Performance on ImageNet Classification
Rectifier Nonlinearities Improve Neural Network Acoustic Models
Rectified Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltzmann Machines

ResNet
Deep Residual Networks won the ILSVRC 2015 challenge. These networks work by introducing shortcut connection across stacks of layers, allowing the optimizer to learn “easier” residual mappings instead of the more complicated original mappings. These shortcut connections are similar to Highway Layers, but they are data-independent and don’t introduce additional parameters or training complexity. ResNets achieved a 3.57% error rate on the ImageNet test set.

Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition

RMSProp
RMSProp is a gradient-based optimization algorithm. It is similar to Adagrad, but introduces an additional decay term to counteract Adagrad’s rapid decrease in learning rate.

Neural Networks for Machine Learning Lecture 6a
Stanford CS231n: Optimization Algorithms
An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms

Seq2Seq
A Sequence-to-Sequence model reads a sequence (such as a sentence) as an input and produces another sequence as an output. It differs from a standard RNN in that the input sequence is completely read before the network starts producing any output. Typically, seq2seq models are implemented using two RNNs, functioning as encoders and decoders. Neural Machine Translation is a typical example of a seq2seq model.

Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks

SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent (Wikipedia) is a gradient-based optimization algorithm that is used to learn network parameters during the training phase. The gradients are typically calculated using the backpropagation algorithm. In practice, people use the minibatch version of SGD, where the parameter updates are performed based on a batch instead of a single example, increasing computational efficiency. Many extensions to vanilla SGD exist, including Momentum, Adagrad, rmsprop, Adadelta or Adam.

Adaptive Subgradient Methods for Online Learning and Stochastic Optimization
Stanford CS231n: Optimization Algorithms
An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms

Softmax
The softmax function is typically used to convert a vector of raw scores into class probabilities at the output layer of a Neural Network used for classification. It normalizes the scores by exponentiating and dividing by a normalization constant. If we are dealing with a large number of classes, a large vocabulary in Machine Translation for example, the normalization constant is expensive to compute. There exist various alternatives to make the computation more efficient, including Hierarchical Softmax or using a sampling-based loss such as NCE.


TensorFlow
TensorFlow is an open source C++/Python software library for numerical computation using data flow graphs, particularly Deep Neural Networks. It was created by Google. In terms of design, it is most similar to Theano, and lower-level than Caffe or Keras.


Theano
Theano is a Python library that allows you to define, optimize, and evaluate mathematical expressions. It contains many building blocks for deep neural networks. Theano is a low-level library similar to Tensorflow. Higher-level libraries include Keras and Caffe.


Vanishing Gradient Problem
The vanishing gradient problem arises in very deep Neural Networks, typically Recurrent Neural Networks, that use activation functions whose gradients tend to be small (in the range of 0 from 1). Because these small gradients are multiplied during backpropagation, they tend to “vanish” throughout the layers, preventing the network from learning long-range dependencies. Common ways to counter this problem is to use activation functions like ReLUs that do not suffer from small gradients, or use architectures like LSTMs that explicitly combat vanishing gradients. The opposite of this problem is called the exploding gradient problem.

On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks

VGG
VGG refers to convolutional neural network model that secured the first and second place in the 2014 ImageNet localization and classification tracks, respectively. The VGG model consist of 16–19 weight layers and uses small convolutional filters of size 3×3 and 1×1.

Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition

word2vec
word2vec is an algorithm and tool to learn word embeddings by trying to predict the context of words in a document. The resulting word vectors have some interesting properties, for example vector('queen') ~= vector('king') - vector('man') + vector('woman'). Two different objectives can be used to learn these embeddings: The Skip-Gram objective tries to predict a context from on a word, and the CBOW objective tries to predict a word from its context.

Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space
Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality
word2vec Parameter Learning Explained


A
A/B testing
A statistical way of comparing two (or more) techniques, typically an incumbent against a new rival. A/B testing aims to determine not only which technique performs better but also to understand whether the difference is statistically significant. A/B testing usually considers only two techniques using one measurement, but it can be applied to any finite number of techniques and measures.

accuracy
The fraction of predictions that a classification model got right. In multi-class classification, accuracy is defined as follows:

Accuracy=Correct PredictionsTotal Number Of Examples
In binary classification, accuracy has the following definition:

Accuracy=True Positives+True NegativesTotal Number Of Examples
See true positive and true negative.

action
#rl
In reinforcement learning, the mechanism by which the agent transitions between states of the environment. The agent chooses the action by using a policy.

activation function
A function (for example, ReLU or sigmoid) that takes in the weighted sum of all of the inputs from the previous layer and then generates and passes an output value (typically nonlinear) to the next layer.

active learning
A training approach in which the algorithm chooses some of the data it learns from. Active learning is particularly valuable when labeled examples are scarce or expensive to obtain. Instead of blindly seeking a diverse range of labeled examples, an active learning algorithm selectively seeks the particular range of examples it needs for learning.

AdaGrad
A sophisticated gradient descent algorithm that rescales the gradients of each parameter, effectively giving each parameter an independent learning rate. For a full explanation, see this paper.

agent
#rl
In reinforcement learning, the entity that uses a policy to maximize expected return gained from transitioning between states of the environment.

agglomerative clustering
#clustering
See hierarchical clustering.

AR
Abbreviation for augmented reality.

area under the PR curve
See PR AUC (Area under the PR Curve).

area under the ROC curve
See AUC (Area under the ROC curve).

artificial general intelligence
A non-human mechanism that demonstrates a broad range of problem solving, creativity, and adaptability. For example, a program demonstrating artificial general intelligence could translate text, compose symphonies, and excel at games that have not yet been invented.

artificial intelligence
A non-human program or model that can solve sophisticated tasks. For example, a program or model that translates text or a program or model that identifies diseases from radiologic images both exhibit artificial intelligence.

Formally, machine learning is a sub-field of artificial intelligence. However, in recent years, some organizations have begun using the terms artificial intelligence and machine learning interchangeably.

attribute
#fairness
Synonym for feature. In fairness, attributes often refer to characteristics pertaining to individuals.

AUC (Area under the ROC Curve)
An evaluation metric that considers all possible classification thresholds.

The Area Under the ROC curve is the probability that a classifier will be more confident that a randomly chosen positive example is actually positive than that a randomly chosen negative example is positive.

augmented reality
#image
A technology that superimposes a computer-generated image on a user's view of the real world, thus providing a composite view.

automation bias
#fairness
When a human decision maker favors recommendations made by an automated decision-making system over information made without automation, even when the automated decision-making system makes errors.

average precision
A metric for summarizing the performance of a ranked sequence of results. Average precision is calculated by taking the average of the precision values for each relevant result (each result in the ranked list where the recall increases relative to the previous result).

See also Area under the PR Curve.

B
backpropagation
The primary algorithm for performing gradient descent on neural networks. First, the output values of each node are calculated (and cached) in a forward pass. Then, the partial derivative of the error with respect to each parameter is calculated in a backward pass through the graph.

bag of words
A representation of the words in a phrase or passage, irrespective of order. For example, bag of words represents the following three phrases identically:

the dog jumps
jumps the dog
dog jumps the
Each word is mapped to an index in a sparse vector, where the vector has an index for every word in the vocabulary. For example, the phrase the dog jumps is mapped into a feature vector with non-zero values at the three indices corresponding to the words the, dog, and jumps. The non-zero value can be any of the following:

A 1 to indicate the presence of a word.
A count of the number of times a word appears in the bag. For example, if the phrase were the maroon dog is a dog with maroon fur, then both maroon and dog would be represented as 2, while the other words would be represented as 1.
Some other value, such as the logarithm of the count of the number of times a word appears in the bag.
baseline
A model used as a reference point for comparing how well another model (typically, a more complex one) is performing. For example, a logistic regression model might serve as a good baseline for a deep model.

For a particular problem, the baseline helps model developers quantify the minimal expected performance that a new model must achieve for the new model to be useful.

batch
The set of examples used in one iteration (that is, one gradient update) of model training.

See also batch size.

batch normalization
Normalizing the input or output of the activation functions in a hidden layer. Batch normalization can provide the following benefits:

Make neural networks more stable by protecting against outlier weights.
Enable higher learning rates.
Reduce overfitting.
batch size
The number of examples in a batch. For example, the batch size of SGD is 1, while the batch size of a mini-batch is usually between 10 and 1000. Batch size is usually fixed during training and inference; however, TensorFlow does permit dynamic batch sizes.

Bayesian neural network
A probabilistic neural network that accounts for uncertainty in weights and outputs. A standard neural network regression model typically predicts a scalar value; for example, a model predicts a house price of 853,000. By contrast, a Bayesian neural network predicts a distribution of values; for example, a model predicts a house price of 853,000 with a standard deviation of 67,200. A Bayesian neural network relies on Bayes' Theorem to calculate uncertainties in weights and predictions. A Bayesian neural network can be useful when it is important to quantify uncertainty, such as in models related to pharmaceuticals. Bayesian neural networks can also help prevent overfitting.

Bellman equation
#rl
In reinforcement learning, the following identity satisfied by the optimal Q-function:

Q(s,a)=r(s,a)+γEs′|s,amaxa′Q(s′,a′))
Reinforcement learning algorithms apply this identity to create Q-learning via the following update rule:

Q(s,a)←Q(s,a)+α[r(s,a)+γmaxa1Q(s′,a′)−Q(s,a)]
Beyond reinforcement learning, the Bellman equation has applications to dynamic programming. See the Wikipedia entry for Bellman Equation.

bias (ethics/fairness)
#fairness
1. Stereotyping, prejudice or favoritism towards some things, people, or groups over others. These biases can affect collection and interpretation of data, the design of a system, and how users interact with a system. Forms of this type of bias include:

automation bias
confirmation bias
experimenter’s bias
group attribution bias
implicit bias
in-group bias
out-group homogeneity bias
2. Systematic error introduced by a sampling or reporting procedure. Forms of this type of bias include:

coverage bias
non-response bias
participation bias
reporting bias
sampling bias
selection bias
Not to be confused with the bias term in machine learning models or prediction bias.

bias (math)
An intercept or offset from an origin. Bias (also known as the bias term) is referred to as b or w0 in machine learning models. For example, bias is the b in the following formula:

y′=b+w1x1+w2x2+…wnxn
Not to be confused with bias in ethics and fairness or prediction bias.

bigram
#seq
An N-gram in which N=2.

binary classification
A type of classification task that outputs one of two mutually exclusive classes. For example, a machine learning model that evaluates email messages and outputs either "spam" or "not spam" is a binary classifier.

binning
See bucketing.

boosting
A machine learning technique that iteratively combines a set of simple and not very accurate classifiers (referred to as "weak" classifiers) into a classifier with high accuracy (a "strong" classifier) by upweighting the examples that the model is currently misclassfying.

bounding box
#image
In an image, the (x, y) coordinates of a rectangle around an area of interest, such as the dog in the image below.

Photograph of a dog sitting on a sofa. A green bounding box
          with top-left coordinates of (275, 1271) and bottom-right
          coordinates of (2954, 2761) circumscribes the dog's body

broadcasting
Expanding the shape of an operand in a matrix math operation to dimensions compatible for that operation. For instance, linear algebra requires that the two operands in a matrix addition operation must have the same dimensions. Consequently, you can't add a matrix of shape (m, n) to a vector of length n. Broadcasting enables this operation by virtually expanding the vector of length n to a matrix of shape (m,n) by replicating the same values down each column.

For example, given the following definitions, linear algebra prohibits A+B because A and B have different dimensions:

A = [[7, 10, 4],
     [13, 5, 9]]
B = [2]

However, broadcasting enables the operation A+B by virtually expanding B to:

 [[2, 2, 2],
  [2, 2, 2]]

Thus, A+B is now a valid operation:

[[7, 10, 4],  +  [[2, 2, 2],  =  [[ 9, 12, 6],
 [13, 5, 9]]      [2, 2, 2]]      [15, 7, 11]]

See the following description of broadcasting in NumPy for more details.

bucketing
Converting a (usually continuous) feature into multiple binary features called buckets or bins, typically based on value range. For example, instead of representing temperature as a single continuous floating-point feature, you could chop ranges of temperatures into discrete bins. Given temperature data sensitive to a tenth of a degree, all temperatures between 0.0 and 15.0 degrees could be put into one bin, 15.1 to 30.0 degrees could be a second bin, and 30.1 to 50.0 degrees could be a third bin.

C
calibration layer
A post-prediction adjustment, typically to account for prediction bias. The adjusted predictions and probabilities should match the distribution of an observed set of labels.

candidate generation
#recsystems
The initial set of recommendations chosen by a recommendation system. For example, consider a bookstore that offers 100,000 titles. The candidate generation phase creates a much smaller list of suitable books for a particular user, say 500. But even 500 books is way too many to recommend to a user. Subsequent, more expensive, phases of a recommendation system (such as scoring and re-ranking) whittle down those 500 to a much smaller, more useful set of recommendations.

candidate sampling
A training-time optimization in which a probability is calculated for all the positive labels, using, for example, softmax, but only for a random sample of negative labels. For example, if we have an example labeled beagle and dog candidate sampling computes the predicted probabilities and corresponding loss terms for the beagle and dog class outputs in addition to a random subset of the remaining classes (cat, lollipop, fence). The idea is that the negative classes can learn from less frequent negative reinforcement as long as positive classes always get proper positive reinforcement, and this is indeed observed empirically. The motivation for candidate sampling is a computational efficiency win from not computing predictions for all negatives.

categorical data
Features having a discrete set of possible values. For example, consider a categorical feature named house style, which has a discrete set of three possible values: Tudor, ranch, colonial. By representing house style as categorical data, the model can learn the separate impacts of Tudor, ranch, and colonial on house price.

Sometimes, values in the discrete set are mutually exclusive, and only one value can be applied to a given example. For example, a car maker categorical feature would probably permit only a single value (Toyota) per example. Other times, more than one value may be applicable. A single car could be painted more than one different color, so a car color categorical feature would likely permit a single example to have multiple values (for example, red and white).

Categorical features are sometimes called discrete features.

Contrast with numerical data.

centroid
#clustering
The center of a cluster as determined by a k-means or k-median algorithm. For instance, if k is 3, then the k-means or k-median algorithm finds 3 centroids.

centroid-based clustering
#clustering
A category of clustering algorithms that organizes data into nonhierarchical clusters. k-means is the most widely used centroid-based clustering algorithm.

Contrast with hierarchical clustering algorithms.

checkpoint
Data that captures the state of the variables of a model at a particular time. Checkpoints enable exporting model weights, as well as performing training across multiple sessions. Checkpoints also enable training to continue past errors (for example, job preemption). Note that the graph itself is not included in a checkpoint.

class
One of a set of enumerated target values for a label. For example, in a binary classification model that detects spam, the two classes are spam and not spam. In a multi-class classification model that identifies dog breeds, the classes would be poodle, beagle, pug, and so on.

classification model
A type of machine learning model for distinguishing among two or more discrete classes. For example, a natural language processing classification model could determine whether an input sentence was in French, Spanish, or Italian. Compare with regression model.

classification threshold
A scalar-value criterion that is applied to a model's predicted score in order to separate the positive class from the negative class. Used when mapping logistic regression results to binary classification. For example, consider a logistic regression model that determines the probability of a given email message being spam. If the classification threshold is 0.9, then logistic regression values above 0.9 are classified as spam and those below 0.9 are classified as not spam.

class-imbalanced dataset
A binary classification problem in which the labels for the two classes have significantly different frequencies. For example, a disease dataset in which 0.0001 of examples have positive labels and 0.9999 have negative labels is a class-imbalanced problem, but a football game predictor in which 0.51 of examples label one team winning and 0.49 label the other team winning is not a class-imbalanced problem.

clipping
A technique for handling outliers. Specifically, reducing feature values that are greater than a set maximum value down to that maximum value. Also, increasing feature values that are less than a specific minimum value up to that minimum value.

For example, suppose that only a few feature values fall outside the range 40–60. In this case, you could do the following:

Clip all values over 60 to be exactly 60.
Clip all values under 40 to be exactly 40.
In addition to bringing input values within a designated range, clipping can also used to force gradient values within a designated range during training.

Cloud TPU
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
A specialized hardware accelerator designed to speed up machine learning workloads on Google Cloud Platform.

clustering
#clustering
Grouping related examples, particularly during unsupervised learning. Once all the examples are grouped, a human can optionally supply meaning to each cluster.

Many clustering algorithms exist. For example, the k-means algorithm clusters examples based on their proximity to a centroid, as in the following diagram:



A human researcher could then review the clusters and, for example, label cluster 1 as "dwarf trees" and cluster 2 as "full-size trees."

As another example, consider a clustering algorithm based on an example's distance from a center point, illustrated as follows:



co-adaptation
When neurons predict patterns in training data by relying almost exclusively on outputs of specific other neurons instead of relying on the network's behavior as a whole. When the patterns that cause co-adaption are not present in validation data, then co-adaptation causes overfitting. Dropout regularization reduces co-adaptation because dropout ensures neurons cannot rely solely on specific other neurons.

collaborative filtering
#recsystems
Making predictions about the interests of one user based on the interests of many other users. Collaborative filtering is often used in recommendation systems.

confirmation bias
#fairness
The tendency to search for, interpret, favor, and recall information in a way that confirms one's preexisting beliefs or hypotheses. Machine learning developers may inadvertently collect or label data in ways that influence an outcome supporting their existing beliefs. Confirmation bias is a form of implicit bias.

Experimenter's bias is a form of confirmation bias in which an experimenter continues training models until a preexisting hypothesis is confirmed.

confusion matrix
An NxN table that summarizes how successful a classification model's predictions were; that is, the correlation between the label and the model's classification. One axis of a confusion matrix is the label that the model predicted, and the other axis is the actual label. N represents the number of classes. In a binary classification problem, N=2. For example, here is a sample confusion matrix for a binary classification problem:

Tumor (predicted)	Non-Tumor (predicted)
Tumor (actual)	18	1
Non-Tumor (actual)	6	452
The preceding confusion matrix shows that of the 19 samples that actually had tumors, the model correctly classified 18 as having tumors (18 true positives), and incorrectly classified 1 as not having a tumor (1 false negative). Similarly, of 458 samples that actually did not have tumors, 452 were correctly classified (452 true negatives) and 6 were incorrectly classified (6 false positives).

The confusion matrix for a multi-class classification problem can help you determine mistake patterns. For example, a confusion matrix could reveal that a model trained to recognize handwritten digits tends to mistakenly predict 9 instead of 4, or 1 instead of 7.

Confusion matrices contain sufficient information to calculate a variety of performance metrics, including precision and recall.

continuous feature
A floating-point feature with an infinite range of possible values. Contrast with discrete feature.

convenience sampling
Using a dataset not gathered scientifically in order to run quick experiments. Later on, it's essential to switch to a scientifically gathered dataset.

convergence
Informally, often refers to a state reached during training in which training loss and validation loss change very little or not at all with each iteration after a certain number of iterations. In other words, a model reaches convergence when additional training on the current data will not improve the model. In deep learning, loss values sometimes stay constant or nearly so for many iterations before finally descending, temporarily producing a false sense of convergence.

See also early stopping.

See also Boyd and Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization.

convex function
A function in which the region above the graph of the function is a convex set. The prototypical convex function is shaped something like the letter U. For example, the following are all convex functions:

A typical convex function is shaped like the letter 'U'.

By contrast, the following function is not convex. Notice how the region above the graph is not a convex set:



A strictly convex function has exactly one local minimum point, which is also the global minimum point. The classic U-shaped functions are strictly convex functions. However, some convex functions (for example, straight lines) are not U-shaped.

A lot of the common loss functions, including the following, are convex functions:

L2 loss
Log Loss
L1 regularization
L2 regularization
Many variations of gradient descent are guaranteed to find a point close to the minimum of a strictly convex function. Similarly, many variations of stochastic gradient descent have a high probability (though, not a guarantee) of finding a point close to the minimum of a strictly convex function.

The sum of two convex functions (for example, L2 loss + L1 regularization) is a convex function.

Deep models are never convex functions. Remarkably, algorithms designed for convex optimization tend to find reasonably good solutions on deep networks anyway, even though those solutions are not guaranteed to be a global minimum.

convex optimization
The process of using mathematical techniques such as gradient descent to find the minimum of a convex function. A great deal of research in machine learning has focused on formulating various problems as convex optimization problems and in solving those problems more efficiently.

For complete details, see Boyd and Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization.

convex set
A subset of Euclidean space such that a line drawn between any two points in the subset remains completely within the subset. For instance, the following two shapes are convex sets:

A rectangle
and a semi-ellipse are both convex sets.

By contrast, the following two shapes are not convex sets:

A pie-chart
with a missing slice and a firework are both nonconvex sets.

convolution
#image
In mathematics, casually speaking, a mixture of two functions. In machine learning, a convolution mixes the convolutional filter and the input matrix in order to train weights.

The term "convolution" in machine learning is often a shorthand way of referring to either convolutional operation or convolutional layer.

Without convolutions, a machine learning algorithm would have to learn a separate weight for every cell in a large tensor. For example, a machine learning algorithm training on 2K x 2K images would be forced to find 4M separate weights. Thanks to convolutions, a machine learning algorithm only has to find weights for every cell in the convolutional filter, dramatically reducing the memory needed to train the model. When the convolutional filter is applied, it is simply replicated across cells such that each is multiplied by the filter.

convolutional filter
#image
One of the two actors in a convolutional operation. (The other actor is a slice of an input matrix.) A convolutional filter is a matrix having the same rank as the input matrix, but a smaller shape. For example, given a 28x28 input matrix, the filter could be any 2D matrix smaller than 28x28.

In photographic manipulation, all the cells in a convolutional filter are typically set to a constant pattern of ones and zeroes. In machine learning, convolutional filters are typically seeded with random numbers and then the network trains the ideal values.

convolutional layer
#image
A layer of a deep neural network in which a convolutional filter passes along an input matrix. For example, consider the following 3x3 convolutional filter:



The following animation shows a convolutional layer consisting of 9 convolutional operations involving the 5x5 input matrix. Notice that each convolutional operation works on a different 3x3 slice of the input matrix. The resulting 3x3 matrix (on the right) consists of the results of the 9 convolutional operations:



convolutional neural network
#image
A neural network in which at least one layer is a convolutional layer. A typical convolutional neural network consists of some combination of the following layers:

convolutional layers
pooling layers
dense layers
Convolutional neural networks have had great success in certain kinds of problems, such as image recognition.

convolutional operation
#image
The following two-step mathematical operation:

Element-wise multiplication of the convolutional filter and a slice of an input matrix. (The slice of the input matrix has the same rank and size as the convolutional filter.)
Summation of all the values in the resulting product matrix.
For example, consider the following 5x5 input matrix:



Now imagine the following 2x2 convolutional filter:



Each convolutional operation involves a single 2x2 slice of the input matrix. For instance, suppose we use the 2x2 slice at the top-left of the input matrix. So, the convolution operation on this slice looks as follows:



A convolutional layer consists of a series of convolutional operations, each acting on a different slice of the input matrix.

cost
Synonym for loss.

counterfactual fairness
#fairnessA fairness metric that checks whether a classifier produces the same result for one individual as it does for another individual who is identical to the first, except with respect to one or more sensitive attributes. Evaluating a classifier for counterfactual fairness is one method for surfacing potential sources of bias in a model.
See "When Worlds Collide: Integrating Different Counterfactual Assumptions in Fairness" for a more detailed discussion of counterfactual fairness.

coverage bias
#fairness
See selection bias.

crash blossom
A sentence or phrase with an ambiguous meaning. Crash blossoms present a significant problem in natural language understanding. For example, the headline Red Tape Holds Up Skyscraper is a crash blossom because an NLU model could interpret the headline literally or figuratively.

critic
#rl
Synonym for Deep Q-Network.

cross-entropy
A generalization of Log Loss to multi-class classification problems. Cross-entropy quantifies the difference between two probability distributions. See also perplexity.

cross-validation
A mechanism for estimating how well a model will generalize to new data by testing the model against one or more non-overlapping data subsets withheld from the training set.

custom Estimator
#TensorFlow
An Estimator that you write yourself by following these directions.

Contrast with premade Estimators.

D
data analysis
Obtaining an understanding of data by considering samples, measurement, and visualization. Data analysis can be particularly useful when a dataset is first received, before one builds the first model. It is also crucial in understanding experiments and debugging problems with the system.

data augmentation
#image
Artificially boosting the range and number of training examples by transforming existing examples to create additional examples. For example, suppose images are one of your features, but your dataset doesn't contain enough image examples for the model to learn useful associations. Ideally, you'd add enough labeled images to your dataset to enable your model to train properly. If that's not possible, data augmentation can rotate, stretch, and reflect each image to produce many variants of the original picture, possibly yielding enough labeled data to enable excellent training.

DataFrame
A popular datatype for representing datasets in pandas. A DataFrame is analogous to a table. Each column of the DataFrame has a name (a header), and each row is identified by a number.

data set or dataset
A collection of examples.

Dataset API (tf.data)
#TensorFlow
A high-level TensorFlow API for reading data and transforming it into a form that a machine learning algorithm requires. A tf.data.Dataset object represents a sequence of elements, in which each element contains one or more Tensors. A tf.data.Iterator object provides access to the elements of a Dataset.

For details about the Dataset API, see Importing Data in the TensorFlow Programmer's Guide.

decision boundary
The separator between classes learned by a model in a binary class or multi-class classification problems. For example, in the following image representing a binary classification problem, the decision boundary is the frontier between the orange class and the blue class:

A
well-defined boundary between one class and another.

decision threshold
Synonym for classification threshold.

decision tree
A model represented as a sequence of branching statements. For example, the following over-simplified decision tree branches a few times to predict the price of a house (in thousands of USD). According to this decision tree, a house larger than 160 square meters, having more than three bedrooms, and built less than 10 years ago would have a predicted price of 510 thousand USD.

A
tree three-levels deep whose branches predict house prices.

Machine learning can generate deep decision trees.

deep model
A type of neural network containing multiple hidden layers.

Contrast with wide model.

deep neural network
Synonym for deep model.

Deep Q-Network (DQN)
#rl
In Q-learning, a deep neural network that predicts Q-functions.

Critic is a synonym for Deep Q-Network.

demographic parity
#fairness
A fairness metric that is satisfied if the results of a model's classification are not dependent on a given sensitive attribute.

For example, if both Lilliputians and Brobdingnagians apply to Glubbdubdrib University, demographic parity is achieved if the percentage of Lilliputians admitted is the same as the percentage of Brobdingnagians admitted, irrespective of whether one group is on average more qualified than the other.

Contrast with equalized odds and equality of opportunity, which permit classification results in aggregate to depend on sensitive attributes, but do not permit classification results for certain specified ground-truth labels to depend on sensitive attributes. See "Attacking discrimination with smarter machine learning" for a visualization exploring the tradeoffs when optimizing for demographic parity.

dense feature
A feature in which most values are non-zero, typically a Tensor of floating-point values. Contrast with sparse feature.

dense layer
Synonym for fully connected layer.

depth
The number of layers (including any embedding layers) in a neural network that learn weights. For example, a neural network with 5 hidden layers and 1 output layer has a depth of 6.

depthwise separable convolutional neural network (sepCNN)
#image
A convolutional neural network architecture based on Inception, but where Inception modules are replaced with depthwise separable convolutions. Also known as Xception.

A depthwise separable convolution (also abbreviated as separable convolution) factors a standard 3-D convolution into two separate convolution operations that are more computationally efficient: first, a depthwise convolution, with a depth of 1 (n ✕ n ✕ 1), and then second, a pointwise convolution, with length and width of 1 (1 ✕ 1 ✕ n).

To learn more, see Xception: Deep Learning with Depthwise Separable Convolutions.

device
#TensorFlow
A category of hardware that can run a TensorFlow session, including CPUs, GPUs, and TPUs.

dimension reduction
Decreasing the number of dimensions used to represent a particular feature in a feature vector, typically by converting to an embedding.

dimensions
Overloaded term having any of the following definitions:

The number of levels of coordinates in a Tensor. For example:

A scalar has zero dimensions; for example, ["Hello"].
A vector has one dimension; for example, [3, 5, 7, 11].
A matrix has two dimensions; for example, [[2, 4, 18], [5, 7, 14]].
You can uniquely specify a particular cell in a one-dimensional vector with one coordinate; you need two coordinates to uniquely specify a particular cell in a two-dimensional matrix.

The number of entries in a feature vector.

The number of elements in an embedding layer.

discrete feature
A feature with a finite set of possible values. For example, a feature whose values may only be animal, vegetable, or mineral is a discrete (or categorical) feature. Contrast with continuous feature.

discriminative model
A model that predicts labels from a set of one or more features. More formally, discriminative models define the conditional probability of an output given the features and weights; that is:

p(output | features, weights)

For example, a model that predicts whether an email is spam from features and weights is a discriminative model.

The vast majority of supervised learning models, including classification and regression models, are discriminative models.

Contrast with generative model.

discriminator
A system that determines whether examples are real or fake.

The subsystem within a generative adversarial network that determines whether the examples created by the generator are real or fake.

disparate impact
#fairness
Making decisions about people that impact different population subgroups disproportionately. This usually refers to situations where an algorithmic decision-making process harms or benefits some subgroups more than others.

For example, suppose an algorithm that determines a Lilliputian's eligibility for a miniature-home loan is more likely to classify them as “ineligible” if their mailing address contains a certain postal code. If Big-Endian Lilliputians are more likely to have mailing addresses with this postal code than Little-Endian Lilliputians, then this algorithm may result in disparate impact.

Contrast with disparate treatment, which focuses on disparities that result when subgroup characteristics are explicit inputs to an algorithmic decision-making process.

disparate treatment
#fairness
Factoring subjects' sensitive attributes into an algorithmic decision-making process such that different subgroups of people are treated differently.

For example, consider an algorithm that determines Lilliputians’ eligibility for a miniature-home loan based on the data they provide in their loan application. If the algorithm uses a Lilliputian’s affiliation as Big-Endian or Little-Endian as an input, it is enacting disparate treatment along that dimension.

Contrast with disparate impact, which focuses on disparities in the societal impacts of algorithmic decisions on subgroups, irrespective of whether those subgroups are inputs to the model.

Warning: Because sensitive attributes are almost always correlated with other features the data may have, explicitly removing sensitive attribute information does not guarantee that subgroups will be treated equally. For example, removing sensitive demographic attributes from a training data set that still includes postal code as a feature may address disparate treatment of subgroups, but there still might be disparate impact upon these groups because postal code might serve as a proxy for other demographic information.
divisive clustering
#clustering
See hierarchical clustering.

downsampling
#image
Overloaded term that can mean either of the following:

Reducing the amount of information in a feature in order to train a model more efficiently. For example, before training an image recognition model, downsampling high-resolution images to a lower-resolution format.
Training on a disproportionately low percentage of over-represented class examples in order to improve model training on under-represented classes. For example, in a class-imbalanced dataset, models tend to learn a lot about the majority class and not enough about the minority class. Downsampling helps balance the amount of training on the majority and minority classes.
DQN
#rl
Abbreviation for Deep Q-Network.

dropout regularization
A form of regularization useful in training neural networks. Dropout regularization works by removing a random selection of a fixed number of the units in a network layer for a single gradient step. The more units dropped out, the stronger the regularization. This is analogous to training the network to emulate an exponentially large ensemble of smaller networks. For full details, see Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from Overfitting.

dynamic model
A model that is trained online in a continuously updating fashion. That is, data is continuously entering the model.

E
eager execution
#TensorFlow
A TensorFlow programming environment in which operations run immediately. By contrast, operations called in graph execution don't run until they are explicitly evaluated. Eager execution is an imperative interface, much like the code in most programming languages. Eager execution programs are generally far easier to debug than graph execution programs.

early stopping
A method for regularization that involves ending model training before training loss finishes decreasing. In early stopping, you end model training when the loss on a validation dataset starts to increase, that is, when generalization performance worsens.

embeddings
A categorical feature represented as a continuous-valued feature. Typically, an embedding is a translation of a high-dimensional vector into a low-dimensional space. For example, you can represent the words in an English sentence in either of the following two ways:

As a million-element (high-dimensional) sparse vector in which all elements are integers. Each cell in the vector represents a separate English word; the value in a cell represents the number of times that word appears in a sentence. Since a single English sentence is unlikely to contain more than 50 words, nearly every cell in the vector will contain a 0. The few cells that aren't 0 will contain a low integer (usually 1) representing the number of times that word appeared in the sentence.
As a several-hundred-element (low-dimensional) dense vector in which each element holds a floating-point value between 0 and 1. This is an embedding.
In TensorFlow, embeddings are trained by backpropagating loss just like any other parameter in a neural network.

embedding space
The d-dimensional vector space that features from a higher-dimensional vector space are mapped to. Ideally, the embedding space contains a structure that yields meaningful mathematical results; for example, in an ideal embedding space, addition and subtraction of embeddings can solve word analogy tasks.

The dot product of two embeddings is a measure of their similarity.

empirical risk minimization (ERM)
Choosing the function that minimizes loss on the training set. Contrast with structural risk minimization.

ensemble
A merger of the predictions of multiple models. You can create an ensemble via one or more of the following:

different initializations
different hyperparameters
different overall structure
Deep and wide models are a kind of ensemble.

environment
#rl
In reinforcement learning, the world that contains the agent and allows the agent to observe that world's state. For example, the represented world can be a game like chess, or a physical world like a maze. When the agent applies an action to the environment, then the environment transitions between states.

episode
#rl
In reinforcement learning, each of the repeated attempts by the agent to learn an environment.

epoch
A full training pass over the entire dataset such that each example has been seen once. Thus, an epoch represents N/batch size training iterations, where N is the total number of examples.

epsilon greedy policy
#rl
In reinforcement learning, a policy that either follows a random policy with epsilon probability or a greedy policy otherwise. For example, if epsilon is 0.9, then the policy follows a random policy 90% of the time and a greedy policy 10% of the time.

Over successive episodes, the algorithm reduces epsilon’s value in order to shift from following a random policy to following a greedy policy. By shifting the policy, the agent first randomly explores the environment and then greedily exploits the results of random exploration.

equality of opportunity
#fairnessA fairness metric that checks whether, for a preferred label (one that confers an advantage or benefit to a person) and a given attribute, a classifier predicts that preferred label equally well for all values of that attribute. In other words, equality of opportunity measures whether the people who should qualify for an opportunity are equally likely to do so regardless of their group membership.
For example, suppose Glubbdubdrib University admits both Lilliputians and Brobdingnagians to a rigorous mathematics program. Lilliputians’ secondary schools offer a robust curriculum of math classes, and the vast majority of students are qualified for the university program. Brobdingnagians’ secondary schools don’t offer math classes at all, and as a result, far fewer of their students are qualified. Equality of opportunity is satisfied for the preferred label of "admitted" with respect to nationality (Lilliputian or Brobdingnagian) if qualified students are equally likely to be admitted irrespective of whether they're a Lilliputian or a Brobdingnagian.

For example, let's say 100 Lilliputians and 100 Brobdingnagians apply to Glubbdubdrib University, and admissions decisions are made as follows:

Table 1. Lilliputian applicants (90% are qualified)

 	Qualified	Unqualified
Admitted	45	3
Rejected	45	7
Total	90	10
Percentage of qualified students admitted: 45/90 = 50%
Percentage of unqualified students rejected: 7/10 = 70%
Total percentage of Lilliputian students admitted: (45+3)/100 = 48%
 

Table 2. Brobdingnagian applicants (10% are qualified):

 	Qualified	Unqualified
Admitted	5	9
Rejected	5	81
Total	10	90
Percentage of qualified students admitted: 5/10 = 50%
Percentage of unqualified students rejected: 81/90 = 90%
Total percentage of Brobdingnagian students admitted: (5+9)/100 = 14%
The preceding examples satisfy equality of opportunity for acceptance of qualified students because qualified Lilliputians and Brobdingnagians both have a 50% chance of being admitted.

Note: While equality of opportunity is satisfied, the following two fairness metrics are not satisfied:
demographic parity: Lilliputians and Brobdingnagians are admitted to the university at different rates; 48% of Lilliputians students are admitted, but only 14% of Brobdingnagian students are admitted.
equalized odds: While qualified Lilliputian and Brobdingnagian students both have the same chance of being admitted, the additional constraint that unqualified Lilliputians and Brobdingnagians both have the same chance of being rejected is not satisfied. Unqualified Lilliputians have a 70% rejection rate, whereas unqualified Brobdingnagians have a 90% rejection rate.
See "Equality of Opportunity in Supervised Learning" for a more detailed discussion of equality of opportunity. Also see "Attacking discrimination with smarter machine learning" for a visualization exploring the tradeoffs when optimizing for equality of opportunity.

equalized odds
#fairnessA fairness metric that checks if, for any particular label and attribute, a classifier predicts that label equally well for all values of that attribute.
For example, suppose Glubbdubdrib University admits both Lilliputians and Brobdingnagians to a rigorous mathematics program. Lilliputians' secondary schools offer a robust curriculum of math classes, and the vast majority of students are qualified for the university program. Brobdingnagians' secondary schools don’t offer math classes at all, and as a result, far fewer of their students are qualified. Equalized odds is satisfied provided that no matter whether an applicant is a Lilliputian or a Brobdingnagian, if they are qualified, they are equally as likely to get admitted to the program, and if they are not qualified, they are equally as likely to get rejected.

Let’s say 100 Lilliputians and 100 Brobdingnagians apply to Glubbdubdrib University, and admissions decisions are made as follows:

Table 3. Lilliputian applicants (90% are qualified)

 	Qualified	Unqualified
Admitted	45	2
Rejected	45	8
Total	90	10
Percentage of qualified students admitted: 45/90 = 50%
Percentage of unqualified students rejected: 8/10 = 80%
Total percentage of Lilliputian students admitted: (45+2)/100 = 47%
 

Table 4. Brobdingnagian applicants (10% are qualified):

 	Qualified	Unqualified
Admitted	5	18
Rejected	5	72
Total	10	90
Percentage of qualified students admitted: 5/10 = 50%
Percentage of unqualified students rejected: 72/90 = 80%
Total percentage of Brobdingnagian students admitted: (5+18)/100 = 23%
Equalized odds is satisfied because qualified Lilliputian and Brobdingnagian students both have a 50% chance of being admitted, and unqualified Lilliputian and Brobdingnagian have an 80% chance of being rejected.

Note: While equalized odds is satisfied here, demographic parity is not satisfied. Lilliputian and Brobdingnagian students are admitted to Glubbdubdrib University at different rates; 47% of Lilliputian students are admitted, and 23% of Brobdingnagian students are admitted.
Equalized odds is formally defined in "Equality of Opportunity in Supervised Learning" as follows: "predictor Ŷ satisfies equalized odds with respect to protected attribute A and outcome Y if Ŷ and A are independent, conditional on Y."

Note: Contrast equalized odds with the more relaxed equality of opportunity metric.
Estimator
#TensorFlow
An instance of the tf.Estimator class, which encapsulates logic that builds a TensorFlow graph and runs a TensorFlow session. You may create your own custom Estimators (as described here) or instantiate premade Estimators created by others.

example
One row of a dataset. An example contains one or more features and possibly a label. See also labeled example and unlabeled example.

experience replay
#rl
In reinforcement learning, a DQN technique used to reduce temporal correlations in training data. The agent stores state transitions in a replay buffer, and then samples transitions from the replay buffer to create training data.

experimenter's bias
#fairness
See confirmation bias.

exploding gradient problem
#seq
The tendency for gradients in a deep neural networks (especially recurrent neural networks) to become surprisingly steep (high). Steep gradients result in very large updates to the weights of each node in a deep neural network.

Models suffering from the exploding gradient problem become difficult or impossible to train. Gradient clipping can mitigate this problem.

Compare to vanishing gradient problem.

F
fairness constraint
#fairnessApplying a constraint to an algorithm to ensure one or more definitions of fairness are satisfied. Examples of fairness constraints include:
Post-processing your model's output.
Altering the loss function to incorporate a penalty for violating a fairness metric.
Directly adding a mathematical constraint to an optimization problem.
fairness metric
#fairness
A mathematical definition of “fairness” that is measurable. Some commonly used fairness metrics include:

equalized odds
predictive parity
counterfactual fairness
demographic parity
Many fairness metrics are mutually exclusive; see incompatibility of fairness metrics.

false negative (FN)
An example in which the model mistakenly predicted the negative class. For example, the model inferred that a particular email message was not spam (the negative class), but that email message actually was spam.

false positive (FP)
An example in which the model mistakenly predicted the positive class. For example, the model inferred that a particular email message was spam (the positive class), but that email message was actually not spam.

false positive rate (FPR)
The x-axis in an ROC curve. The false positive rate is defined as follows:

False Positive Rate=False PositivesFalse Positives+True Negatives
feature
An input variable used in making predictions.

Feature column (tf.feature_column)
#TensorFlow
A function that specifies how a model should interpret a particular feature. A list that collects the output returned by calls to such functions is a required parameter to all Estimators constructors.

The tf.feature_column functions enable models to easily experiment with different representations of input features. For details, see the Feature Columns chapter in the TensorFlow Programmers Guide.

"Feature column" is Google-specific terminology. A feature column is referred to as a "namespace" in the VW system (at Yahoo/Microsoft), or a field.

feature cross
A synthetic feature formed by crossing (taking a Cartesian product of) individual binary features obtained from categorical data or from continuous features via bucketing. Feature crosses help represent nonlinear relationships.

feature engineering
The process of determining which features might be useful in training a model, and then converting raw data from log files and other sources into said features. In TensorFlow, feature engineering often means converting raw log file entries to tf.Example protocol buffers. See also tf.Transform.

Feature engineering is sometimes called feature extraction.

feature extraction
Overloaded term having either of the following definitions:

Retrieving intermediate feature representations calculated by an unsupervised or pretrained model (for example, hidden layer values in a neural network) for use in another model as input.
Synonym for feature engineering.
feature set
The group of features your machine learning model trains on. For example, postal code, property size, and property condition might comprise a simple feature set for a model that predicts housing prices.

feature spec
#TensorFlow
Describes the information required to extract features data from the tf.Example protocol buffer. Because the tf.Example protocol buffer is just a container for data, you must specify the following:

the data to extract (that is, the keys for the features)
the data type (for example, float or int)
The length (fixed or variable)
The Estimator API provides facilities for producing a feature spec from a list of FeatureColumns.

feature vector
The list of feature values representing an example passed into a model.

federated learning
A distributed machine learning approach that trains machine learning models using decentralized examples residing on devices such as smartphones. In federated learning, a subset of devices downloads the current model from a central coordinating server. The devices use the examples stored on the devices to make improvements to the model. The devices then upload the model improvements (but not the training examples) to the coordinating server, where they are aggregated with other updates to yield an improved global model. After the aggregation, the model updates computed by devices are no longer needed, and can be discarded.

Since the training examples are never uploaded, federated learning follows the privacy principles of focused data collection and data minimization.

For more information about federated learning, see this tutorial.

feedback loop
In machine learning, a situation in which a model's predictions influence the training data for the same model or another model. For example, a model that recommends movies will influence the movies that people see, which will then influence subsequent movie recommendation models.

feedforward neural network (FFN)
A neural network without cyclic or recursive connections. For example, traditional deep neural networks are feedforward neural networks. Contrast with recurrent neural networks, which are cyclic.

few-shot learning
A machine learning approach, often used for object classification, designed to learn effective classifiers from only a small number of training examples.

See also one-shot learning.

fine tuning
Perform a secondary optimization to adjust the parameters of an already trained model to fit a new problem. Fine tuning often refers to refitting the weights of a trained unsupervised model to a supervised model.

forget gate
#seq
The portion of a Long Short-Term Memory cell that regulates the flow of information through the cell. Forget gates maintain context by deciding which information to discard from the cell state.

full softmax
See softmax. Contrast with candidate sampling.

fully connected layer
A hidden layer in which each node is connected to every node in the subsequent hidden layer.

A fully connected layer is also known as a dense layer.

G
GAN
Abbreviation for generative adversarial network.

generalization
Refers to your model's ability to make correct predictions on new, previously unseen data as opposed to the data used to train the model.

generalization curve
A loss curve showing both the training set and the validation set. A generalization curve can help you detect possible overfitting. For example, the following generalization curve suggests overfitting because loss for the validation set ultimately becomes significantly higher than for the training set.

A Cartesian plot in which the y-axis is labeled 'loss' and the x-axis
is labeled 'iterations'. Two graphs appear. One graph shows a loss curve
for a training set and the other graph shows a loss curve for a validation
set. The two curves start off similarly, but the curve for the training set
eventually dips far lower than the curve for the validation set.

generalized linear model
A generalization of least squares regression models, which are based on Gaussian noise, to other types of models based on other types of noise, such as Poisson noise or categorical noise. Examples of generalized linear models include:

logistic regression
multi-class regression
least squares regression
The parameters of a generalized linear model can be found through convex optimization.

Generalized linear models exhibit the following properties:

The average prediction of the optimal least squares regression model is equal to the average label on the training data.
The average probability predicted by the optimal logistic regression model is equal to the average label on the training data.
The power of a generalized linear model is limited by its features. Unlike a deep model, a generalized linear model cannot "learn new features."

generative adversarial network (GAN)
A system to create new data in which a generator creates data and a discriminator determines whether that created data is valid or invalid.

generative model
Practically speaking, a model that does either of the following:

Creates (generates) new examples from the training dataset. For example, a generative model could create poetry after training on a dataset of poems. The generator part of a generative adversarial network falls into this category.
Determines the probability that a new example comes from the training set, or was created from the same mechanism that created the training set. For example, after training on a dataset consisting of English sentences, a generative model could determine the probability that new input is a valid English sentence.
A generative model can theoretically discern the distribution of examples or particular features in a dataset. That is:

p(examples)

Unsupervised learning models are generative.

Contrast with discriminative models.

generator
The subsystem within a generative adversarial network that creates new examples.

Contrast with discriminative model.

gradient
The vector of partial derivatives with respect to all of the independent variables. In machine learning, the gradient is the vector of partial derivatives of the model function. The gradient points in the direction of steepest ascent.

gradient clipping
#seq
A commonly used mechanism to mitigate the exploding gradient problem by artificially limiting (clipping) the maximum value of gradients when using gradient descent to train a model.

gradient descent
A technique to minimize loss by computing the gradients of loss with respect to the model's parameters, conditioned on training data. Informally, gradient descent iteratively adjusts parameters, gradually finding the best combination of weights and bias to minimize loss.

graph
#TensorFlow
In TensorFlow, a computation specification. Nodes in the graph represent operations. Edges are directed and represent passing the result of an operation (a Tensor) as an operand to another operation. Use TensorBoard to visualize a graph.

graph execution
#TensorFlow
A TensorFlow programming environment in which the program first constructs a graph and then executes all or part of that graph. Graph execution is the default execution mode in TensorFlow 1.x.

Contrast with eager execution.

greedy policy
#rl
In reinforcement learning, a policy that always chooses the action with the highest expected return.

ground truth
The correct answer. Reality. Since reality is often subjective, expert raters typically are the proxy for ground truth.

group attribution bias
#fairness
Assuming that what is true for an individual is also true for everyone in that group. The effects of group attribution bias can be exacerbated if a convenience sampling is used for data collection. In a non-representative sample, attributions may be made that do not reflect reality.

See also out-group homogeneity bias and in-group bias.

H
hashing
In machine learning, a mechanism for bucketing categorical data, particularly when the number of categories is large, but the number of categories actually appearing in the dataset is comparatively small.

For example, Earth is home to about 60,000 tree species. You could represent each of the 60,000 tree species in 60,000 separate categorical buckets. Alternatively, if only 200 of those tree species actually appear in a dataset, you could use hashing to divide tree species into perhaps 500 buckets.

A single bucket could contain multiple tree species. For example, hashing could place baobab and red maple—two genetically dissimilar species—into the same bucket. Regardless, hashing is still a good way to map large categorical sets into the desired number of buckets. Hashing turns a categorical feature having a large number of possible values into a much smaller number of values by grouping values in a deterministic way.

For more information on hashing, see the Feature Columns chapter in the TensorFlow Programmers Guide.

heuristic
A quick solution to a problem, which may or may not be the best solution. For example, "With a heuristic, we achieved 86% accuracy. When we switched to a deep neural network, accuracy went up to 98%."

hidden layer
A synthetic layer in a neural network between the input layer (that is, the features) and the output layer (the prediction). Hidden layers typically contain an activation function (such as ReLU) for training. A deep neural network contains more than one hidden layer.

hierarchical clustering
#clustering
A category of clustering algorithms that create a tree of clusters. Hierarchical clustering is well-suited to hierarchical data, such as botanical taxonomies. There are two types of hierarchical clustering algorithms:

Agglomerative clustering first assigns every example to its own cluster, and iteratively merges the closest clusters to create a hierarchical tree.
Divisive clustering first groups all examples into one cluster and then iteratively divides the cluster into a hierarchical tree.
Contrast with centroid-based clustering.

hinge loss
A family of loss functions for classification designed to find the decision boundary as distant as possible from each training example, thus maximizing the margin between examples and the boundary. KSVMs use hinge loss (or a related function, such as squared hinge loss). For binary classification, the hinge loss function is defined as follows:

loss=max(0,1−(y∗y′))
where y is the true label, either -1 or +1, and y' is the raw output of the classifier model:

y′=b+w1x1+w2x2+…wnxn
Consequently, a plot of hinge loss vs. (y * y') looks as follows:



holdout data
Examples intentionally not used ("held out") during training. The validation dataset and test dataset are examples of holdout data. Holdout data helps evaluate your model's ability to generalize to data other than the data it was trained on. The loss on the holdout set provides a better estimate of the loss on an unseen dataset than does the loss on the training set.

hyperparameter
The "knobs" that you tweak during successive runs of training a model. For example, learning rate is a hyperparameter.

Contrast with parameter.

hyperplane
A boundary that separates a space into two subspaces. For example, a line is a hyperplane in two dimensions and a plane is a hyperplane in three dimensions. More typically in machine learning, a hyperplane is the boundary separating a high-dimensional space. Kernel Support Vector Machines use hyperplanes to separate positive classes from negative classes, often in a very high-dimensional space.

I
i.i.d.
Abbreviation for independently and identically distributed.

image recognition
#image
A process that classifies object(s), pattern(s), or concept(s) in an image. Image recognition is also known as image classification.

For more information, see ML Practicum: Image Classification.

imbalanced dataset
Synonym for class-imbalanced dataset.

implicit bias
#fairness
Automatically making an association or assumption based on one’s mental models and memories. Implicit bias can affect the following:

How data is collected and classified.
How machine learning systems are designed and developed.
For example, when building a classifier to identify wedding photos, an engineer may use the presence of a white dress in a photo as a feature. However, white dresses have been customary only during certain eras and in certain cultures.

See also confirmation bias.

incompatibility of fairness metrics
#fairness
The idea that some notions of fairness are mutually incompatible and cannot be satisfied simultaneously. As a result, there is no single universal metric for quantifying fairness that can be applied to all ML problems.

While this may seem discouraging, incompatibility of fairness metrics doesn’t imply that fairness efforts are fruitless. Instead, it suggests that fairness must be defined contextually for a given ML problem, with the goal of preventing harms specific to its use cases.

See "On the (im)possibility of fairness" for a more detailed discussion of this topic.

independently and identically distributed (i.i.d)
Data drawn from a distribution that doesn't change, and where each value drawn doesn't depend on values that have been drawn previously. An i.i.d. is the ideal gas of machine learning—a useful mathematical construct but almost never exactly found in the real world. For example, the distribution of visitors to a web page may be i.i.d. over a brief window of time; that is, the distribution doesn't change during that brief window and one person's visit is generally independent of another's visit. However, if you expand that window of time, seasonal differences in the web page's visitors may appear.

individual fairness
#fairness
A fairness metric that checks whether similar individuals are classified similarly. For example, Brobdingnagian Academy might want to satisfy individual fairness by ensuring that two students with identical grades and standardized test scores are equally likely to gain admission.

Note that individual fairness relies entirely on how you define "similarity" (in this case, grades and test scores), and you can run the risk of introducing new fairness problems if your similarity metric misses important information (such as the rigor of a student’s curriculum).

See "Fairness Through Awareness" for a more detailed discussion of individual fairness.

inference
In machine learning, often refers to the process of making predictions by applying the trained model to unlabeled examples. In statistics, inference refers to the process of fitting the parameters of a distribution conditioned on some observed data. (See the Wikipedia article on statistical inference.)

in-group bias
#fairness
Showing partiality to one's own group or own characteristics. If testers or raters consist of the machine learning developer's friends, family, or colleagues, then in-group bias may invalidate product testing or the dataset.

In-group bias is a form of group attribution bias. See also out-group homogeneity bias.

input function
#TensorFlow
In TensorFlow, a function that returns input data to the training, evaluation, or prediction method of an Estimator. For example, the training input function returns a batch of features and labels from the training set.

input layer
The first layer (the one that receives the input data) in a neural network.

instance
Synonym for example.

interpretability
The degree to which a model's predictions can be readily explained. Deep models are often non-interpretable; that is, a deep model's different layers can be hard to decipher. By contrast, linear regression models and wide models are typically far more interpretable.

inter-rater agreement
A measurement of how often human raters agree when doing a task. If raters disagree, the task instructions may need to be improved. Also sometimes called inter-annotator agreement or inter-rater reliability. See also Cohen's kappa, which is one of the most popular inter-rater agreement measurements.

intersection over union (IoU)
#image
The intersection of two sets divided by their union. In machine-learning image-detection tasks, IoU is used to measure the accuracy of the model’s predicted bounding box with respect to the ground-truth bounding box. In this case, the IoU for the two boxes is the ratio between the overlapping area and the total area, and its value ranges from 0 (no overlap of predicted bounding box and ground-truth bounding box) to 1 (predicted bounding box and ground-truth bounding box have the exact same coordinates).

For example, in the image below:

The predicted bounding box (the coordinates delimiting where the model predicts the night table in the painting is located) is outlined in purple.
The ground-truth bounding box (the coordinates delimiting where the night table in the painting is actually located) is outlined in green.
The Van Gogh painting 'Vincent's Bedroom in Arles', with two different
          bounding boxes around the night table beside the bed. The ground-truth
          bounding box (in green) perfectly circumscribes the night table. The
          predicted bounding box (in purple) is offset 50% down and to the right
          of the ground-truth bounding box; it encloses the bottom-right quarter
          of the night table, but misses the rest of the table.

Here, the intersection of the bounding boxes for prediction and ground truth (below left) is 1, and the union of the bounding boxes for prediction and ground truth (below right) is 7, so the IoU is 17.

Same image as above, but with each bounding box divided into four
          quadrants. There are seven quadrants total, as the bottom-right
          quadrant of the ground-truth bounding box and the top-left
          quadrant of the predicted bounding box overlap each other. This
          overlapping section (highlighted in green) represents the
          intersection, and has an area of 1. Same image as above, but with each bounding box divided into four
          quadrants. There are seven quadrants total, as the bottom-right
          quadrant of the ground-truth bounding box and the top-left
          quadrant of the predicted bounding box overlap each other.
          The entire interior enclosed by both bounding boxes
          (highlighted in green) represents the union, and has
          an area of 7.
IoU
Abbreviation for intersection over union.

item matrix
#recsystems
In recommendation systems, a matrix of embeddings generated by matrix factorization that holds latent signals about each item. Each row of the item matrix holds the value of a single latent feature for all items. For example, consider a movie recommendation system. Each column in the item matrix represents a single movie. The latent signals might represent genres, or might be harder-to-interpret signals that involve complex interactions among genre, stars, movie age, or other factors.

The item matrix has the same number of columns as the target matrix that is being factorized. For example, given a movie recommendation system that evaluates 10,000 movie titles, the item matrix will have 10,000 columns.

items
#recsystems
In a recommendation system, the entities that a system recommends. For example, videos are the items that a video store recommends, while books are the items that a bookstore recommends.

iteration
A single update of a model's weights during training. An iteration consists of computing the gradients of the parameters with respect to the loss on a single batch of data.

K
Keras
A popular Python machine learning API. Keras runs on several deep learning frameworks, including TensorFlow, where it is made available as tf.keras.

keypoints
#image
The coordinates of particular features in an image. For example, for an image recognition model that distinguishes flower species, keypoints might be the center of each petal, the stem, the stamen, and so on.

Kernel Support Vector Machines (KSVMs)
A classification algorithm that seeks to maximize the margin between positive and negative classes by mapping input data vectors to a higher dimensional space. For example, consider a classification problem in which the input dataset has a hundred features. To maximize the margin between positive and negative classes, a KSVM could internally map those features into a million-dimension space. KSVMs uses a loss function called hinge loss.

k-means
#clustering
A popular clustering algorithm that groups examples in unsupervised learning. The k-means algorithm basically does the following:

Iteratively determines the best k center points (known as centroids).
Assigns each example to the closest centroid. Those examples nearest the same centroid belong to the same group.
The k-means algorithm picks centroid locations to minimize the cumulative square of the distances from each example to its closest centroid.

For example, consider the following plot of dog height to dog width:



If k=3, the k-means algorithm will determine three centroids. Each example is assigned to its closest centroid, yielding three groups:



Imagine that a manufacturer wants to determine the ideal sizes for small, medium, and large sweaters for dogs. The three centroids identify the mean height and mean width of each dog in that cluster. So, the manufacturer should probably base sweater sizes on those three centroids. Note that the centroid of a cluster is typically not an example in the cluster.

The preceding illustrations shows k-means for examples with only two features (height and width). Note that k-means can group examples across many features.

k-median
#clustering
A clustering algorithm closely related to k-means. The practical difference between the two is as follows:

In k-means, centroids are determined by minimizing the sum of the squares of the distance between a centroid candidate and each of its examples.
In k-median, centroids are determined by minimizing the sum of the distance between a centroid candidate and each of its examples.
Note that the definitions of distance are also different:

k-means relies on the Euclidean distance from the centroid to an example. (In two dimensions, the Euclidean distance means using the Pythagorean theorem to calculate the hypotenuse.) For example, the k-means distance between (2,2) and (5,-2) would be:
Euclidean distance=(2−5)2+(2−−2)2=5
k-median relies on the Manhattan distance from the centroid to an example. This distance is the sum of the absolute deltas in each dimension. For example, the k-median distance between (2,2) and (5,-2) would be:
Manhattan distance=|2−5|+|2−−2|=7
L
L1 loss
Loss function based on the absolute value of the difference between the values that a model is predicting and the actual values of the labels. L1 loss is less sensitive to outliers than L2 loss.

L1 regularization
A type of regularization that penalizes weights in proportion to the sum of the absolute values of the weights. In models relying on sparse features, L1 regularization helps drive the weights of irrelevant or barely relevant features to exactly 0, which removes those features from the model. Contrast with L2 regularization.

L2 loss
See squared loss.

L2 regularization
A type of regularization that penalizes weights in proportion to the sum of the squares of the weights. L2 regularization helps drive outlier weights (those with high positive or low negative values) closer to 0 but not quite to 0. (Contrast with L1 regularization.) L2 regularization always improves generalization in linear models.

label
In supervised learning, the "answer" or "result" portion of an example. Each example in a labeled dataset consists of one or more features and a label. For instance, in a housing dataset, the features might include the number of bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, and the age of the house, while the label might be the house's price. In a spam detection dataset, the features might include the subject line, the sender, and the email message itself, while the label would probably be either "spam" or "not spam."

labeled example
An example that contains features and a label. In supervised training, models learn from labeled examples.

lambda
Synonym for regularization rate.

(This is an overloaded term. Here we're focusing on the term's definition within regularization.)

landmarks
#image
Synonym for keypoints.

layer
A set of neurons in a neural network that process a set of input features, or the output of those neurons.

Also, an abstraction in TensorFlow. Layers are Python functions that take Tensors and configuration options as input and produce other tensors as output. Once the necessary Tensors have been composed, the user can convert the result into an Estimator via a model function.

Layers API (tf.layers)
#TensorFlow
A TensorFlow API for constructing a deep neural network as a composition of layers. The Layers API enables you to build different types of layers, such as:

tf.layers.Dense for a fully-connected layer.
tf.layers.Conv2D for a convolutional layer.
When writing a custom Estimator, you compose Layers objects to define the characteristics of all the hidden layers.

The Layers API follows the Keras layers API conventions. That is, aside from a different prefix, all functions in the Layers API have the same names and signatures as their counterparts in the Keras layers API.

learning rate
A scalar used to train a model via gradient descent. During each iteration, the gradient descent algorithm multiplies the learning rate by the gradient. The resulting product is called the gradient step.

Learning rate is a key hyperparameter.

least squares regression
A linear regression model trained by minimizing L2 Loss.

linear model
A model that assigns one weight per feature to make predictions. (Linear models also incorporate a bias.) By contrast, the relationship of weights to features in deep models is not one-to-one.

A linear model uses the following formula:

y′=b+w1x1+w2x2+…wnxn
where:

y′ is the raw prediction. (In certain kinds of linear models, this raw prediction will be further modified. For example, see logistic regression.)
b is the bias.
w is a weight, so w1 is the weight of the first feature, w2 is the weight of the second feature, and so on.
x is a feature, so x1 is the value of the first feature, x2 is the value of the second feature, and so on.
For example, suppose a linear model for three features learns the following bias and weights:

b = 7
w1 = -2.5
w2 = -1.2
w3 = 1.4
Therefore, given three features (x1, x2, and x3), the linear model uses the following equation to generate each prediction:

y′=7+(−2.5)(x1)+(−1.2)(x2)+(1.4)(x3)
Suppose a particular example contains the following values:

x1 = 4
x2 = -10
x3 = 5
Plugging those values into the formula yields a prediction for this example:

y′=7+(−2.5)(4)+(−1.2)(−10)+(1.4)(5)
y′=16
Linear models tend to be easier to analyze and train than deep models. However, deep models can model complex relationships between features.

Linear regression and logistic regression are two types of linear models. Linear models include not only models that use the linear equation but also a broader set of models that use the linear equation as part of the formula. For example, logistic regression post-processes the raw prediction (y′) to calculate the prediction.

linear regression
Using the raw output (y′) of a linear model as the actual prediction in a regression model. The goal of a regression problem is to make a real-valued prediction. For example, if the raw output (y′) of a linear model is 8.37, then the prediction is 8.37.

Contrast linear regression with logistic regression. Also, contrast regression with classification.

logistic regression
A classification model that uses a sigmoid function to convert a linear model's raw prediction (y′) into a value between 0 and 1. You can interpret the value between 0 and 1 in either of the following two ways:

As a probability that the example belongs to the positive class in a binary classification problem.
As a value to be compared against a classification threshold. If the value is equal to or above the classification threshold, the system classifies the example as the positive class. Conversely, if the value is below the given threshold, the system classifies the example as the negative class. For example, suppose the classification threshold is 0.82:
Imagine an example that produces a raw prediction (y′) of 2.6. The sigmoid of 2.6 is 0.93. Since 0.93 is greater than 0.82, the system classifies this example as the positive class.
Imagine a different example that produces a raw prediction of 1.3. The sigmoid of 1.3 is 0.79. Since 0.79 is less than 0.82, the system classifies that example as the negative class.
Although logistic regression is often used in binary classification problems, logistic regression can also be used in multi-class classification problems (where it becomes called multi-class logistic regression or multinomial regression).

logits
The vector of raw (non-normalized) predictions that a classification model generates, which is ordinarily then passed to a normalization function. If the model is solving a multi-class classification problem, logits typically become an input to the softmax function. The softmax function then generates a vector of (normalized) probabilities with one value for each possible class.

In addition, logits sometimes refer to the element-wise inverse of the sigmoid function. For more information, see tf.nn.sigmoid_cross_entropy_with_logits.

Log Loss
The loss function used in binary logistic regression.

log-odds
The logarithm of the odds of some event.

If the event refers to a binary probability, then odds refers to the ratio of the probability of success (p) to the probability of failure (1-p). For example, suppose that a given event has a 90% probability of success and a 10% probability of failure. In this case, odds is calculated as follows:

odds=p(1-p)=.9.1=9
The log-odds is simply the logarithm of the odds. By convention, "logarithm" refers to natural logarithm, but logarithm could actually be any base greater than 1. Sticking to convention, the log-odds of our example is therefore:

log-odds=ln(9) =2.2
The log-odds are the inverse of the sigmoid function.

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
#seq
A type of cell in a recurrent neural network used to process sequences of data in applications such as handwriting recognition, machine translation, and image captioning. LSTMs address the vanishing gradient problem that occurs when training RNNs due to long data sequences by maintaining history in an internal memory state based on new input and context from previous cells in the RNN.

loss
A measure of how far a model's predictions are from its label. Or, to phrase it more pessimistically, a measure of how bad the model is. To determine this value, a model must define a loss function. For example, linear regression models typically use mean squared error for a loss function, while logistic regression models use Log Loss.

loss curve
A graph of loss as a function of training iterations. For example:

A
graph of loss versus training iterations, showing a steady drop as iterations
increase, but then a slight rise in loss at a high number of iterations.

The loss curve can help you determine when your model is converging, overfitting, or underfitting.

loss surface
A graph of weight(s) vs. loss. Gradient descent aims to find the weight(s) for which the loss surface is at a local minimum.

LSTM
#seq
Abbreviation for Long Short-Term Memory.

M
machine learning
A program or system that builds (trains) a predictive model from input data. The system uses the learned model to make useful predictions from new (never-before-seen) data drawn from the same distribution as the one used to train the model. Machine learning also refers to the field of study concerned with these programs or systems.

majority class
The more common label in a class-imbalanced dataset. For example, given a dataset containing 99% non-spam labels and 1% spam labels, the non-spam labels are the majority class.

Markov decision process (MDP)
#rl
A graph representing the decision-making model where decisions (or actions) are taken to navigate a sequence of states under the assumption that the Markov property holds. In reinforcement learning, these transitions between states return a numerical reward.

Markov property
#rl
A property of certain environments, where state transitions are entirely determined by information implicit in the current state and the agent’s action.

matplotlib
An open-source Python 2D plotting library. matplotlib helps you visualize different aspects of machine learning.

matrix factorization
#recsystems
In math, a mechanism for finding the matrices whose dot product approximates a target matrix.

In recommendation systems, the target matrix often holds users' ratings on items. For example, the target matrix for a movie recommendation system might look something like the following, where the positive integers are user ratings and 0 means that the user didn't rate the movie:

 	Casablanca	The Philadelphia Story	Black Panther	Wonder Woman	Pulp Fiction
User 1	5.0	3.0	0.0	2.0	0.0
User 2	4.0	0.0	0.0	1.0	5.0
User 3	3.0	1.0	4.0	5.0	0.0
The movie recommendation system aims to predict user ratings for unrated movies. For example, will User 1 like Black Panther?

One approach for recommendation systems is to use matrix factorization to generate the following two matrices:

A user matrix, shaped as the number of users X the number of embedding dimensions.
An item matrix, shaped as the number of embedding dimensions X the number of items.
For example, using matrix factorization on our three users and five items could yield the following user matrix and item matrix:

User Matrix                 Item Matrix

1.1   2.3           0.9   0.2   1.4    2.0   1.2
0.6   2.0           1.7   1.2   1.2   -0.1   2.1
2.5   0.5

The dot product of the user matrix and item matrix yields a recommendation matrix that contains not only the original user ratings but also predictions for the movies that each user hasn't seen. For example, consider User 1's rating of Casablanca, which was 5.0. The dot product corresponding to that cell in the recommendation matrix should hopefully be around 5.0, and it is:

(1.1 * 0.9) + (2.3 * 1.7) = 4.9

More importantly, will User 1 like Black Panther? Taking the dot product corresponding to the first row and the third column yields a predicted rating of 4.3:

(1.1 * 1.4) + (2.3 * 1.2) = 4.3

Matrix factorization typically yields a user matrix and item matrix that, together, are significantly more compact than the target matrix.

Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
An error metric calculated by taking an average of absolute errors. In the context of evaluating a model’s accuracy, MAE is the average absolute difference between the expected and predicted values across all training examples. Specifically, for n examples, for each value y and its prediction y^, MAE is defined as follows:

MAE=1n∑i=0n|yi−y^i|
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
The average squared loss per example. MSE is calculated by dividing the squared loss by the number of examples. The values that TensorFlow Playground displays for "Training loss" and "Test loss" are MSE.

metric
#TensorFlow
A number that you care about. May or may not be directly optimized in a machine-learning system. A metric that your system tries to optimize is called an objective.

Metrics API (tf.metrics)
A TensorFlow API for evaluating models. For example, tf.metrics.accuracy determines how often a model's predictions match labels. When writing a custom Estimator, you invoke Metrics API functions to specify how your model should be evaluated.

mini-batch
A small, randomly selected subset of the entire batch of examples run together in a single iteration of training or inference. The batch size of a mini-batch is usually between 10 and 1,000. It is much more efficient to calculate the loss on a mini-batch than on the full training data.

mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
A gradient descent algorithm that uses mini-batches. In other words, mini-batch SGD estimates the gradient based on a small subset of the training data. Vanilla SGD uses a mini-batch of size 1.

minimax loss
A loss function for generative adversarial networks, based on the cross-entropy between the distribution of generated data and real data.

Minimax loss is used in the first paper to describe generative adversarial networks.

minority class
The less common label in a class-imbalanced dataset. For example, given a dataset containing 99% non-spam labels and 1% spam labels, the spam labels are the minority class.

ML
Abbreviation for machine learning.

MNIST
#image
A public-domain dataset compiled by LeCun, Cortes, and Burges containing 60,000 images, each image showing how a human manually wrote a particular digit from 0–9. Each image is stored as a 28x28 array of integers, where each integer is a grayscale value between 0 and 255, inclusive.

MNIST is a canonical dataset for machine learning, often used to test new machine learning approaches. For details, see The MNIST Database of Handwritten Digits.

model
The representation of what a machine learning system has learned from the training data. Within TensorFlow, model is an overloaded term, which can have either of the following two related meanings:

The TensorFlow graph that expresses the structure of how a prediction will be computed.
The particular weights and biases of that TensorFlow graph, which are determined by training.
model capacity
The complexity of problems that a model can learn. The more complex the problems that a model can learn, the higher the model’s capacity. A model’s capacity typically increases with the number of model parameters. For a formal definition of classifier capacity, see VC dimension.

model function
#TensorFlow
The function within an Estimator that implements machine learning training, evaluation, and inference. For example, the training portion of a model function might handle tasks such as defining the topology of a deep neural network and identifying its optimizer function. When using premade Estimators, someone has already written the model function for you. When using custom Estimators, you must write the model function yourself.

For details about writing a model function, see the Creating Custom Estimators chapter in the TensorFlow Programmers Guide.

model training
The process of determining the best model.

Momentum
A sophisticated gradient descent algorithm in which a learning step depends not only on the derivative in the current step, but also on the derivatives of the step(s) that immediately preceded it. Momentum involves computing an exponentially weighted moving average of the gradients over time, analogous to momentum in physics. Momentum sometimes prevents learning from getting stuck in local minima.

multi-class classification
Classification problems that distinguish among more than two classes. For example, there are approximately 128 species of maple trees, so a model that categorized maple tree species would be multi-class. Conversely, a model that divided emails into only two categories (spam and not spam) would be a binary classification model.

multi-class logistic regression
Using logistic regression in multi-class classification problems.

multinomial classification
Synonym for multi-class classification.

N
NaN trap
When one number in your model becomes a NaN during training, which causes many or all other numbers in your model to eventually become a NaN.

NaN is an abbreviation for "Not a Number."

natural language understanding
Determining a user's intentions based on what the user typed or said. For example, a search engine uses natural language understanding to determine what the user is searching for based on what the user typed or said.

negative class
In binary classification, one class is termed positive and the other is termed negative. The positive class is the thing we're looking for and the negative class is the other possibility. For example, the negative class in a medical test might be "not tumor." The negative class in an email classifier might be "not spam." See also positive class.

neural network
A model that, taking inspiration from the brain, is composed of layers (at least one of which is hidden) consisting of simple connected units or neurons followed by nonlinearities.

neuron
A node in a neural network, typically taking in multiple input values and generating one output value. The neuron calculates the output value by applying an activation function (nonlinear transformation) to a weighted sum of input values.

N-gram
#seq
An ordered sequence of N words. For example, truly madly is a 2-gram. Because order is relevant, madly truly is a different 2-gram than truly madly.

N	Name(s) for this kind of N-gram	Examples
2	bigram or 2-gram	to go, go to, eat lunch, eat dinner
3	trigram or 3-gram	ate too much, three blind mice, the bell tolls
4	4-gram	walk in the park, dust in the wind, the boy ate lentils
Many natural language understanding models rely on N-grams to predict the next word that the user will type or say. For example, suppose a user typed three blind. An NLU model based on trigrams would likely predict that the user will next type mice.

Contrast N-grams with bag of words, which are unordered sets of words.

NLU
Abbreviation for natural language understanding.

node (neural network)
A neuron in a hidden layer.

node (TensorFlow graph)
#TensorFlow
An operation in a TensorFlow graph.

noise
Broadly speaking, anything that obscures the signal in a dataset. Noise can be introduced into data in a variety of ways. For example:

Human raters make mistakes in labeling.
Humans and instruments mis-record or omit feature values.
non-response bias
#fairness
See selection bias.

normalization
The process of converting an actual range of values into a standard range of values, typically -1 to +1 or 0 to 1. For example, suppose the natural range of a certain feature is 800 to 6,000. Through subtraction and division, you can normalize those values into the range -1 to +1.

See also scaling.

numerical data
Features represented as integers or real-valued numbers. For example, in a real estate model, you would probably represent the size of a house (in square feet or square meters) as numerical data. Representing a feature as numerical data indicates that the feature's values have a mathematical relationship to each other and possibly to the label. For example, representing the size of a house as numerical data indicates that a 200 square-meter house is twice as large as a 100 square-meter house. Furthermore, the number of square meters in a house probably has some mathematical relationship to the price of the house.

Not all integer data should be represented as numerical data. For example, postal codes in some parts of the world are integers; however, integer postal codes should not be represented as numerical data in models. That's because a postal code of 20000 is not twice (or half) as potent as a postal code of 10000. Furthermore, although different postal codes do correlate to different real estate values, we can't assume that real estate values at postal code 20000 are twice as valuable as real estate values at postal code 10000. Postal codes should be represented as categorical data instead.

Numerical features are sometimes called continuous features.

NumPy
An open-source math library that provides efficient array operations in Python. pandas is built on NumPy.

O
objective
A metric that your algorithm is trying to optimize.

objective function
The mathematical formula or metric that a model aims to optimize. For example, the objective function for linear regression is usually squared loss. Therefore, when training a linear regression model, the goal is to minimize squared loss.

In some cases, the goal is to maximize the objective function. For example, if the objective function is accuracy, the goal is to maximize accuracy.

See also loss.

offline inference
Generating a group of predictions, storing those predictions, and then retrieving those predictions on demand. Contrast with online inference.

one-hot encoding
A sparse vector in which:

One element is set to 1.
All other elements are set to 0.
One-hot encoding is commonly used to represent strings or identifiers that have a finite set of possible values. For example, suppose a given botany dataset chronicles 15,000 different species, each denoted with a unique string identifier. As part of feature engineering, you'll probably encode those string identifiers as one-hot vectors in which the vector has a size of 15,000.

one-shot learning
A machine learning approach, often used for object classification, designed to learn effective classifiers from a single training example.

See also few-shot learning.

one-vs.-all
Given a classification problem with N possible solutions, a one-vs.-all solution consists of N separate binary classifiers—one binary classifier for each possible outcome. For example, given a model that classifies examples as animal, vegetable, or mineral, a one-vs.-all solution would provide the following three separate binary classifiers:

animal vs. not animal
vegetable vs. not vegetable
mineral vs. not mineral
online inference
Generating predictions on demand. Contrast with offline inference.

Operation (op)
#TensorFlow
A node in the TensorFlow graph. In TensorFlow, any procedure that creates, manipulates, or destroys a Tensor is an operation. For example, a matrix multiply is an operation that takes two Tensors as input and generates one Tensor as output.

optimizer
A specific implementation of the gradient descent algorithm. TensorFlow's base class for optimizers is tf.train.Optimizer. Popular optimizers include:

AdaGrad, which stands for ADAptive GRADient descent.
Adam, which stands for ADAptive with Momentum.
Different optimizers may leverage one or more of the following concepts to enhance the effectiveness of gradient descent on a given training set:

momentum (Momentum)
update frequency
sparsity/regularization (Ftrl)
more complex math (Proximal, and others)
You might even imagine an NN-driven optimizer.

out-group homogeneity bias
#fairness
The tendency to see out-group members as more alike than in-group members when comparing attitudes, values, personality traits, and other characteristics. In-group refers to people you interact with regularly; out-group refers to people you do not interact with regularly. If you create a dataset by asking people to provide attributes about out-groups, those attributes may be less nuanced and more stereotyped than attributes that participants list for people in their in-group.

For example, Lilliputians might describe the houses of other Lilliputians in great detail, citing small differences in architectural styles, windows, doors, and sizes. However, the same Lilliputians might simply declare that Brobdingnagians all live in identical houses.

Out-group homogeneity bias is a form of group attribution bias.

See also in-group bias.

outliers
Values distant from most other values. In machine learning, any of the following are outliers:

Weights with high absolute values.
Predicted values relatively far away from the actual values.
Input data whose values are more than roughly 3 standard deviations from the mean.
Outliers often cause problems in model training. Clipping is one way of managing outliers.

output layer
The "final" layer of a neural network. The layer containing the answer(s).

overfitting
Creating a model that matches the training data so closely that the model fails to make correct predictions on new data.

P
pandas
A column-oriented data analysis API. Many machine learning frameworks, including TensorFlow, support pandas data structures as input. See the pandas documentation for details.

parameter
A variable of a model that the machine learning system trains on its own. For example, weights are parameters whose values the machine learning system gradually learns through successive training iterations. Contrast with hyperparameter.

Parameter Server (PS)
#TensorFlow
A job that keeps track of a model's parameters in a distributed setting.

See the TensorFlow Architecture chapter in the TensorFlow Programmers Guide for details.

parameter update
The operation of adjusting a model's parameters during training, typically within a single iteration of gradient descent.

partial derivative
A derivative in which all but one of the variables is considered a constant. For example, the partial derivative of f(x, y) with respect to x is the derivative of f considered as a function of x alone (that is, keeping y constant). The partial derivative of f with respect to x focuses only on how x is changing and ignores all other variables in the equation.

participation bias
#fairness
Synonym for non-response bias. See selection bias.

partitioning strategy
The algorithm by which variables are divided across parameter servers.

perceptron
A system (either hardware or software) that takes in one or more input values, runs a function on the weighted sum of the inputs, and computes a single output value. In machine learning, the function is typically nonlinear, such as ReLU, sigmoid, or tanh. For example, the following perceptron relies on the sigmoid function to process three input values:

f(x1,x2,x3)=sigmoid(w1x1+w2x2+w3x3)
In the following illustration, the perceptron takes three inputs, each of which is itself modified by a weight before entering the perceptron:

A perceptron that takes in 3 inputs, each multiplied by separate
weights. The perceptron outputs a single value.

Perceptrons are the (nodes) in deep neural networks. That is, a deep neural network consists of multiple connected perceptrons, plus a backpropagation algorithm to introduce feedback.

performance
Overloaded term with the following meanings:

The traditional meaning within software engineering. Namely: How fast (or efficiently) does this piece of software run?
The meaning within machine learning. Here, performance answers the following question: How correct is this model? That is, how good are the model's predictions?
perplexity
One measure of how well a model is accomplishing its task. For example, suppose your task is to read the first few letters of a word a user is typing on a smartphone keyboard, and to offer a list of possible completion words. Perplexity, P, for this task is approximately the number of guesses you need to offer in order for your list to contain the actual word the user is trying to type.

Perplexity is related to cross-entropy as follows:

P=2−cross entropy
pipeline
The infrastructure surrounding a machine learning algorithm. A pipeline includes gathering the data, putting the data into training data files, training one or more models, and exporting the models to production.

policy
#rl
In reinforcement learning, an agent's probabilistic mapping from states to actions.

pooling
#image
Reducing a matrix (or matrices) created by an earlier convolutional layer to a smaller matrix. Pooling usually involves taking either the maximum or average value across the pooled area. For example, suppose we have the following 3x3 matrix:



A pooling operation, just like a convolutional operation, divides that matrix into slices and then slides that convolutional operation by strides. For example, suppose the pooling operation divides the convolutional matrix into 2x2 slices with a 1x1 stride. As the following diagram illustrates, four pooling operations take place. Imagine that each pooling operation picks the maximum value of the four in that slice:



Pooling helps enforce translational invariance in the input matrix.

Pooling for vision applications is known more formally as spatial pooling. Time-series applications usually refer to pooling as temporal pooling. Less formally, pooling is often called subsampling or downsampling.

positive class
In binary classification, the two possible classes are labeled as positive and negative. The positive outcome is the thing we're testing for. (Admittedly, we're simultaneously testing for both outcomes, but play along.) For example, the positive class in a medical test might be "tumor." The positive class in an email classifier might be "spam."

Contrast with negative class.

post-processing
#fairnessProcessing the output of a model after the model has been run. Post-processing can be used to enforce fairness constraints without modifying models themselves.
For example, one might apply post-processing to a binary classifier by setting a classification threshold such that equality of opportunity is maintained for some attribute by checking that the true positive rate is the same for all values of that attribute.

PR AUC (area under the PR curve)
Area under the interpolated precision-recall curve, obtained by plotting (recall, precision) points for different values of the classification threshold. Depending on how it's calculated, PR AUC may be equivalent to the average precision of the model.

precision
A metric for classification models. Precision identifies the frequency with which a model was correct when predicting the positive class. That is:

Precision=True PositivesTrue Positives+False Positives
precision-recall curve
A curve of precision vs. recall at different classification thresholds.

prediction
A model's output when provided with an input example.

prediction bias
A value indicating how far apart the average of predictions is from the average of labels in the dataset.

Not to be confused with the bias term in machine learning models or with bias in ethics and fairness.

predictive parity
#fairness
A fairness metric that checks whether, for a given classifier, the precision rates are equivalent for subgroups under consideration.

For example, a model that predicts college acceptance would satisfy predictive parity for nationality if its precision rate is the same for Lilliputians and Brobdingnagians.

Predictive parity is sometime also called predictive rate parity.

See "Fairness Definitions Explained" (section 3.2.1) for a more detailed discussion of predictive parity.

predictive rate parity
#fairness
Another name for predictive parity.

premade Estimator
#TensorFlow
An Estimator that someone has already built. TensorFlow provides several premade Estimators, including DNNClassifier, DNNRegressor, and LinearClassifier. To learn more about premade Estimators, see the Premade Estimators chapter in the TensorFlow Programmers Guide.

Contrast with custom estimators.

preprocessing
#fairnessProcessing data before it's used to train a model. Preprocessing could be as simple as removing words from an English text corpus that don't occur in the English dictionary, or could be as complex as re-expressing data points in a way that eliminates as many attributes that are correlated with sensitive attributes as possible. Preprocessing can help satisfy fairness constraints.
pre-trained model
Models or model components (such as embeddings) that have been already been trained. Sometimes, you'll feed pre-trained embeddings into a neural network. Other times, your model will train the embeddings itself rather than rely on the pre-trained embeddings.

prior belief
What you believe about the data before you begin training on it. For example, L2 regularization relies on a prior belief that weights should be small and normally distributed around zero.

proxy (sensitive attributes)
#fairnessAn attribute used as a stand-in for a sensitive attribute. For example, an individual's postal code might be used as a proxy for their income, race, or ethnicity.
proxy labels
Data used to approximate labels not directly available in a dataset.

For example, suppose you want is it raining? to be a Boolean label for your dataset, but the dataset doesn't contain rain data. If photographs are available, you might establish pictures of people carrying umbrellas as a proxy label for is it raining? However, proxy labels may distort results. For example, in some places, it may be more common to carry umbrellas to protect against sun than the rain.

Q
Q-function
#rl
In reinforcement learning, the function that predicts the expected return from taking an action in a state and then following a given policy.

Q-function is also known as state-action value function.

Q-learning
#rl
In reinforcement learning, an algorithm that allows an agent to learn the optimal Q-function of a Markov decision process by applying the Bellman equation. The Markov decision process models an environment.

quantile
Each bucket in quantile bucketing.

quantile bucketing
Distributing a feature's values into buckets so that each bucket contains the same (or almost the same) number of examples. For example, the following figure divides 44 points into 4 buckets, each of which contains 11 points. In order for each bucket in the figure to contain the same number of points, some buckets span a different width of x-values.

40 data
points divided into 4 buckets of 11 points each. Some of the buckets contain
a wider range of feature values than others.

quantization
An algorithm that implements quantile bucketing on a particular feature in a dataset.

queue
#TensorFlow
A TensorFlow Operation that implements a queue data structure. Typically used in I/O.

R
random forest
An ensemble approach to finding the decision tree that best fits the training data by creating many decision trees and then determining the "average" one. The "random" part of the term refers to building each of the decision trees from a random selection of features; the "forest" refers to the set of decision trees.

random policy
#rl
In reinforcement learning, a policy that chooses an action at random.

rank (ordinality)
The ordinal position of a class in a machine learning problem that categorizes classes from highest to lowest. For example, a behavior ranking system could rank a dog's rewards from highest (a steak) to lowest (wilted kale).

rank (Tensor)
#TensorFlow
The number of dimensions in a Tensor. For instance, a scalar has rank 0, a vector has rank 1, and a matrix has rank 2.

Not to be confused with rank (ordinality).

rater
A human who provides labels in examples. Sometimes called an "annotator."

recall
A metric for classification models that answers the following question: Out of all the possible positive labels, how many did the model correctly identify? That is:

Recall=True PositivesTrue Positives+False Negatives
recommendation system
#recsystems
A system that selects for each user a relatively small set of desirable items from a large corpus. For example, a video recommendation system might recommend two videos from a corpus of 100,000 videos, selecting Casablanca and The Philadelphia Story for one user, and Wonder Woman and Black Panther for another. A video recommendation system might base its recommendations on factors such as:

Movies that similar users have rated or watched.
Genre, directors, actors, target demographic...
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
An activation function with the following rules:

If input is negative or zero, output is 0.
If input is positive, output is equal to input.
recurrent neural network
#seq
A neural network that is intentionally run multiple times, where parts of each run feed into the next run. Specifically, hidden layers from the previous run provide part of the input to the same hidden layer in the next run. Recurrent neural networks are particularly useful for evaluating sequences, so that the hidden layers can learn from previous runs of the neural network on earlier parts of the sequence.

For example, the following figure shows a recurrent neural network that runs four times. Notice that the values learned in the hidden layers from the first run become part of the input to the same hidden layers in the second run. Similarly, the values learned in the hidden layer on the second run become part of the input to the same hidden layer in the third run. In this way, the recurrent neural network gradually trains and predicts the meaning of the entire sequence rather than just the meaning of individual words.

An RNN that runs four times to process four input words.

regression model
A type of model that outputs continuous (typically, floating-point) values. Compare with classification models, which output discrete values, such as "day lily" or "tiger lily."

regularization
The penalty on a model's complexity. Regularization helps prevent overfitting. Different kinds of regularization include:

L1 regularization
L2 regularization
dropout regularization
early stopping (this is not a formal regularization method, but can effectively limit overfitting)
regularization rate
A scalar value, represented as lambda, specifying the relative importance of the regularization function. The following simplified loss equation shows the regularization rate's influence:

minimize(loss function + λ(regularization function))
Raising the regularization rate reduces overfitting but may make the model less accurate.

reinforcement learning (RL)
#rl
A family of algorithms that learn an optimal policy, whose goal is to maximize return when interacting with an environment. For example, the ultimate reward of most games is victory. Reinforcement learning systems can become expert at playing complex games by evaluating sequences of previous game moves that ultimately led to wins and sequences that ultimately led to losses.

replay buffer
#rl
In DQN-like algorithms, the memory used by the agent to store state transitions for use in experience replay.

reporting bias
#fairness
The fact that the frequency with which people write about actions, outcomes, or properties is not a reflection of their real-world frequencies or the degree to which a property is characteristic of a class of individuals. Reporting bias can influence the composition of data that machine learning systems learn from.

For example, in books, the word laughed is more prevalent than breathed. A machine learning model that estimates the relative frequency of laughing and breathing from a book corpus would probably determine that laughing is more common than breathing.

representation
The process of mapping data to useful features.

re-ranking
#recsystems
The final stage of a recommendation system, during which scored items may be re-graded according to some other (typically, non-ML) algorithm. Re-ranking evaluates the list of items generated by the scoring phase, taking actions such as:

Eliminating items that the user has already purchased.
Boosting the score of fresher items.
return
#rl
In reinforcement learning, given a certain policy and a certain state, the return is the sum of all rewards that the agent expects to receive when following the policy from the state to the end of the episode. The agent accounts for the delayed nature of expected rewards by discounting rewards according to the state transitions required to obtain the reward.

Therefore, if the discount factor is γ, and r0,…,rN denote the rewards until the end of the episode, then the return calculation is as follows:

Return=r0+γr1+γ2r2+…+γN−1rN−1
reward
#rl
In reinforcement learning, the numerical result of taking an action in a state, as defined by the environment.

ridge regularization
Synonym for L2 regularization. The term ridge regularization is more frequently used in pure statistics contexts, whereas L2 regularization is used more often in machine learning.

RNN
#seq
Abbreviation for recurrent neural networks.

ROC (receiver operating characteristic) Curve
A curve of true positive rate vs. false positive rate at different classification thresholds. See also AUC.

root directory
#TensorFlow
The directory you specify for hosting subdirectories of the TensorFlow checkpoint and events files of multiple models.

Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
The square root of the Mean Squared Error.

rotational invariance
#image
In an image classification problem, an algorithm's ability to successfully classify images even when the orientation of the image changes. For example, the algorithm can still identify a tennis racket whether it is pointing up, sideways, or down. Note that rotational invariance is not always desirable; for example, an upside-down 9 should not be classified as a 9.

See also translational invariance and size invariance.

S
sampling bias
#fairness
See selection bias.

SavedModel
#TensorFlow
The recommended format for saving and recovering TensorFlow models. SavedModel is a language-neutral, recoverable serialization format, which enables higher-level systems and tools to produce, consume, and transform TensorFlow models.

See the Saving and Restoring chapter in the TensorFlow Programmer's Guide for complete details.

Saver
#TensorFlow
A TensorFlow object responsible for saving model checkpoints.

scalar
A single number or a single string that can be represented as a tensor of rank 0. For example, the following lines of code each create one scalar in TensorFlow:

breed = tf.Variable("poodle", tf.string)
temperature = tf.Variable(27, tf.int16)
precision = tf.Variable(0.982375101275, tf.float64)

scaling
A commonly used practice in feature engineering to tame a feature's range of values to match the range of other features in the dataset. For example, suppose that you want all floating-point features in the dataset to have a range of 0 to 1. Given a particular feature's range of 0 to 500, you could scale that feature by dividing each value by 500.

See also normalization.

scikit-learn
A popular open-source machine learning platform. See www.scikit-learn.org.

scoring
#recsystems
The part of a recommendation system that provides a value or ranking for each item produced by the candidate generation phase.

selection bias
#fairness
Errors in conclusions drawn from sampled data due to a selection process that generates systematic differences between samples observed in the data and those not observed. The following forms of selection bias exist:

coverage bias: The population represented in the dataset does not match the population that the machine learning model is making predictions about.
sampling bias: Data is not collected randomly from the target group.
non-response bias (also called participation bias): Users from certain groups opt-out of surveys at different rates than users from other groups.
For example, suppose you are creating a machine learning model that predicts people's enjoyment of a movie. To collect training data, you hand out a survey to everyone in the front row of a theater showing the movie. Offhand, this may sound like a reasonable way to gather a dataset; however, this form of data collection may introduce the following forms of selection bias:

coverage bias: By sampling from a population who chose to see the movie, your model's predictions may not generalize to people who did not already express that level of interest in the movie.
sampling bias: Rather than randomly sampling from the intended population (all the people at the movie), you sampled only the people in the front row. It is possible that the people sitting in the front row were more interested in the movie than those in other rows.
non-response bias: In general, people with strong opinions tend to respond to optional surveys more frequently than people with mild opinions. Since the movie survey is optional, the responses are more likely to form a bimodal distribution than a normal (bell-shaped) distribution.
semi-supervised learning
Training a model on data where some of the training examples have labels but others don’t. One technique for semi-supervised learning is to infer labels for the unlabeled examples, and then to train on the inferred labels to create a new model. Semi-supervised learning can be useful if labels are expensive to obtain but unlabeled examples are plentiful.

sensitive attribute
#fairnessA human attribute that may be given special consideration for legal, ethical, social, or personal reasons.
sentiment analysis
Using statistical or machine learning algorithms to determine a group's overall attitude—positive or negative—toward a service, product, organization, or topic. For example, using natural language understanding, an algorithm could perform sentiment analysis on the textual feedback from a university course to determine the degree to which students generally liked or disliked the course.

sequence model
#seq
A model whose inputs have a sequential dependence. For example, predicting the next video watched from a sequence of previously watched videos.

serving
A synonym for inferring.

session (tf.session)
#TensorFlow
An object that encapsulates the state of the TensorFlow runtime and runs all or part of a graph. When using the low-level TensorFlow APIs, you instantiate and manage one or more tf.session objects directly. When using the Estimators API, Estimators instantiate session objects for you.

shape (Tensor)
The number of elements in each dimension of a tensor. The shape is represented as a list of integers. For example, the following two-dimensional tensor has a shape of [3,4]:

[[5, 7, 6, 4],
 [2, 9, 4, 8],
 [3, 6, 5, 1]]

TensorFlow uses row-major (C-style) format to represent the order of dimensions, which is why the shape in TensorFlow is [3,4] rather than [4,3]. In other words, in a two-dimensional TensorFlow Tensor, the shape is [number of rows, number of columns].

sigmoid function
A function that maps logistic or multinomial regression output (log odds) to probabilities, returning a value between 0 and 1. The sigmoid function has the following formula:

y=11+e−σ
where σ in logistic regression problems is simply:

σ=b+w1x1+w2x2+…wnxn
In other words, the sigmoid function converts σ into a probability between 0 and 1.

In some neural networks, the sigmoid function acts as the activation function.

similarity measure
#clustering
In clustering algorithms, the metric used to determine how alike (how similar) any two examples are.

size invariance
#image
In an image classification problem, an algorithm's ability to successfully classify images even when the size of the image changes. For example, the algorithm can still identify a cat whether it consumes 2M pixels or 200K pixels. Note that even the best image classification algorithms still have practical limits on size invariance. For example, an algorithm (or human) is unlikely to correctly classify a cat image consuming only 20 pixels.

See also translational invariance and rotational invariance.

sketching
#clustering
In unsupervised machine learning, a category of algorithms that perform a preliminary similarity analysis on examples. Sketching algorithms use a locality-sensitive hash function to identify points that are likely to be similar, and then group them into buckets.

Sketching decreases the computation required for similarity calculations on large datasets. Instead of calculating similarity for every single pair of examples in the dataset, we calculate similarity only for each pair of points within each bucket.

softmax
A function that provides probabilities for each possible class in a multi-class classification model. The probabilities add up to exactly 1.0. For example, softmax might determine that the probability of a particular image being a dog at 0.9, a cat at 0.08, and a horse at 0.02. (Also called full softmax.)

Contrast with candidate sampling.

sparse feature
Feature vector whose values are predominately zero or empty. For example, a vector containing a single 1 value and a million 0 values is sparse. As another example, words in a search query could also be a sparse feature—there are many possible words in a given language, but only a few of them occur in a given query.

Contrast with dense feature.

sparse representation
A representation of a tensor that only stores nonzero elements.

For example, the English language consists of about a million words. Consider two ways to represent a count of the words used in one English sentence:

A dense representation of this sentence must set an integer for all one million cells, placing a 0 in most of them, and a low integer into a few of them.
A sparse representation of this sentence stores only those cells symbolizing a word actually in the sentence. So, if the sentence contained only 20 unique words, then the sparse representation for the sentence would store an integer in only 20 cells.
For example, consider two ways to represent the sentence, "Dogs wag tails." As the following tables show, the dense representation consumes about a million cells; the sparse representation consumes only 3 cells:

Dense Representation
Cell Number	Word	Occurrence
0	a	0
1	aardvark	0
2	aargh	0
3	aarti	0
… 140,391 more words with an occurrence of 0
140395	dogs	1
… 633,062 words with an occurrence of 0
773458	tails	1
… 189,135 words with an occurrence of 0
962594	wag	1
… many more words with an occurrence of 0
Sparse Representation
Cell Number	Word	Occurrence
140395	dogs	1
773458	tails	1
962594	wag	1
sparse vector
A vector whose values are mostly zeroes. See also sparse feature.

sparsity
The number of elements set to zero (or null) in a vector or matrix divided by the total number of entries in that vector or matrix. For example, consider a 10x10 matrix in which 98 cells contain zero. The calculation of sparsity is as follows:

sparsity=98100=0.98
Feature sparsity refers to the sparsity of a feature vector; model sparsity refers to the sparsity of the model weights.

spatial pooling
#image
See pooling.

squared hinge loss
The square of the hinge loss. Squared hinge loss penalizes outliers more harshly than regular hinge loss.

squared loss
The loss function used in linear regression. (Also known as L2 Loss.) This function calculates the squares of the difference between a model's predicted value for a labeled example and the actual value of the label. Due to squaring, this loss function amplifies the influence of bad predictions. That is, squared loss reacts more strongly to outliers than L1 loss.

state
#rl
In reinforcement learning, the parameter values that describe the current configuration of the environment, which the agent uses to choose an action.

state-action value function
#rl
Synonym for Q-function.

static model
A model that is trained offline.

stationarity
A property of data in a dataset, in which the data distribution stays constant across one or more dimensions. Most commonly, that dimension is time, meaning that data exhibiting stationarity doesn't change over time. For example, data that exhibits stationarity doesn't change from September to December.

step
A forward and backward evaluation of one batch.

step size
Synonym for learning rate.

stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
A gradient descent algorithm in which the batch size is one. In other words, SGD relies on a single example chosen uniformly at random from a dataset to calculate an estimate of the gradient at each step.

stride
#image
In a convolutional operation or pooling, the delta in each dimension of the next series of input slices. For example, the following animation demonstrates a (1,1) stride during a convolutional operation. Therefore, the next input slice starts one position to the right of the previous input slice. When the operation reaches the right edge, the next slice is all the way over to the left but one position down.



The preceding example demonstrates a two-dimensional stride. If the input matrix is three-dimensional, the stride would also be three-dimensional.

structural risk minimization (SRM)
An algorithm that balances two goals:

The desire to build the most predictive model (for example, lowest loss).
The desire to keep the model as simple as possible (for example, strong regularization).
For example, a function that minimizes loss+regularization on the training set is a structural risk minimization algorithm.

For more information, see http://www.svms.org/srm/.

Contrast with empirical risk minimization.

subsampling
#image
See pooling.

summary
#TensorFlow
In TensorFlow, a value or set of values calculated at a particular step, usually used for tracking model metrics during training.

supervised machine learning
Training a model from input data and its corresponding labels. Supervised machine learning is analogous to a student learning a subject by studying a set of questions and their corresponding answers. After mastering the mapping between questions and answers, the student can then provide answers to new (never-before-seen) questions on the same topic. Compare with unsupervised machine learning.

synthetic feature
A feature not present among the input features, but created from one or more of them. Kinds of synthetic features include:

Bucketing a continuous feature into range bins.
Multiplying (or dividing) one feature value by other feature value(s) or by itself.
Creating a feature cross.
Features created by normalizing or scaling alone are not considered synthetic features.

T
tabular Q-learning
#rl
In reinforcement learning, implementing Q-learning by using a table to store the Q-functions for every combination of state and action.

target
Synonym for label.

target network
#rl
In Deep Q-learning, a neural network that is a stable approximation of the main neural network, where the main neural network implements either a Q-function or a policy. Then, you can train the main network on the Q-values predicted by the target network. Therefore, you prevent the feedback loop that occurs when the main network trains on Q-values predicted by itself. By avoiding this feedback, training stability increases.

temporal data
Data recorded at different points in time. For example, winter coat sales recorded for each day of the year would be temporal data.

Tensor
#TensorFlow
The primary data structure in TensorFlow programs. Tensors are N-dimensional (where N could be very large) data structures, most commonly scalars, vectors, or matrices. The elements of a Tensor can hold integer, floating-point, or string values.

TensorBoard
#TensorFlow
The dashboard that displays the summaries saved during the execution of one or more TensorFlow programs.

TensorFlow
#TensorFlow
A large-scale, distributed, machine learning platform. The term also refers to the base API layer in the TensorFlow stack, which supports general computation on dataflow graphs.

Although TensorFlow is primarily used for machine learning, you may also use TensorFlow for non-ML tasks that require numerical computation using dataflow graphs.

TensorFlow Playground
#TensorFlow
A program that visualizes how different hyperparameters influence model (primarily neural network) training. Go to http://playground.tensorflow.org to experiment with TensorFlow Playground.

TensorFlow Serving
#TensorFlow
A platform to deploy trained models in production.

Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
An application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) that optimizes the performance of machine learning workloads. These ASICs are deployed as multiple TPU chips on a TPU device.

Tensor rank
#TensorFlow
See rank (Tensor).

Tensor shape
#TensorFlow
The number of elements a Tensor contains in various dimensions. For example, a [5, 10] Tensor has a shape of 5 in one dimension and 10 in another.

Tensor size
#TensorFlow
The total number of scalars a Tensor contains. For example, a [5, 10] Tensor has a size of 50.

termination condition
#rl
In reinforcement learning, the conditions that determine when an episode ends, such as when the agent reaches a certain state or exceeds a threshold number of state transitions. For example, in tic-tac-toe (also known as noughts and crosses), an episode terminates either when a player marks three consecutive spaces or when all spaces are marked.

test set
The subset of the dataset that you use to test your model after the model has gone through initial vetting by the validation set.

Contrast with training set and validation set.

tf.Example
#TensorFlow
A standard protocol buffer for describing input data for machine learning model training or inference.

tf.keras
#TensorFlow
An implementation of Keras integrated into TensorFlow.

time series analysis
#clustering
A subfield of machine learning and statistics that analyzes temporal data. Many types of machine learning problems require time series analysis, including classification, clustering, forecasting, and anomaly detection. For example, you could use time series analysis to forecast the future sales of winter coats by month based on historical sales data.

timestep
#seq
One "unrolled" cell within a recurrent neural network. For example, the following figure shows three timesteps (labeled with the subscripts t-1, t, and t+1):



tower
A component of a deep neural network that is itself a deep neural network without an output layer. Typically, each tower reads from an independent data source. Towers are independent until their output is combined in a final layer.

TPU
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
Abbreviation for Tensor Processing Unit.

TPU chip
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
A programmable linear algebra accelerator with on-chip high bandwidth memory that is optimized for machine learning workloads. Multiple TPU chips are deployed on a TPU device.

TPU device
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
A printed circuit board (PCB) with multiple TPU chips, high bandwidth network interfaces, and system cooling hardware.

TPU master
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
The central coordination process running on a host machine that sends and receives data, results, programs, performance, and system health information to the TPU workers. The TPU master also manages the setup and shutdown of TPU devices.

TPU node
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
A TPU resource on Google Cloud Platform with a specific TPU type. The TPU node connects to your VPC Network from a peer VPC network. TPU nodes are a resource defined in the Cloud TPU API.

TPU Pod
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
A specific configuration of TPU devices in a Google data center. All of the devices in a TPU pod are connected to one another over a dedicated high-speed network. A TPU Pod is the largest configuration of TPU devices available for a specific TPU version.

TPU resource
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
A TPU entity on Google Cloud Platform that you create, manage, or consume. For example, TPU nodes and TPU types are TPU resources.

TPU slice
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
A TPU slice is a fractional portion of the TPU devices in a TPU Pod. All of the devices in a TPU slice are connected to one another over a dedicated high-speed network.

TPU type
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
A configuration of one or more TPU devices with a specific TPU hardware version. You select a TPU type when you create a TPU node on Google Cloud Platform. For example, a v2-8 TPU type is a single TPU v2 device with 8 cores. A v3-2048 TPU type has 256 networked TPU v3 devices and a total of 2048 cores. TPU types are a resource defined in the Cloud TPU API.

TPU worker
#TensorFlow#GoogleCloud
A process that runs on a host machine and executes machine learning programs on TPU devices.

training
The process of determining the ideal parameters comprising a model.

training set
The subset of the dataset used to train a model.

Contrast with validation set and test set.

trajectory
#rl
In reinforcement learning, a sequence of tuples that represent a sequence of state transitions of the agent, where each tuple corresponds to the state, action, reward, and next state for a given state transition.

transfer learning
Transferring information from one machine learning task to another. For example, in multi-task learning, a single model solves multiple tasks, such as a deep model that has different output nodes for different tasks. Transfer learning might involve transferring knowledge from the solution of a simpler task to a more complex one, or involve transferring knowledge from a task where there is more data to one where there is less data.

Most machine learning systems solve a single task. Transfer learning is a baby step towards artificial intelligence in which a single program can solve multiple tasks.

translational invariance
#image
In an image classification problem, an algorithm's ability to successfully classify images even when the position of objects within the image changes. For example, the algorithm can still identify a dog, whether it is in the center of the frame or at the left end of the frame.

See also size invariance and rotational invariance.

trigram
#seq
An N-gram in which N=3.

true negative (TN)
An example in which the model correctly predicted the negative class. For example, the model inferred that a particular email message was not spam, and that email message really was not spam.

true positive (TP)
An example in which the model correctly predicted the positive class. For example, the model inferred that a particular email message was spam, and that email message really was spam.

true positive rate (TPR)
Synonym for recall. That is:

True Positive Rate=True PositivesTrue Positives+False Negatives
True positive rate is the y-axis in an ROC curve.

U
unawareness (to a sensitive attribute)
#fairness
A situation in which sensitive attributes are present, but not included in the training data. Because sensitive attributes are often correlated with other attributes of one’s data, a model trained with unawareness about a sensitive attribute could still have disparate impact with respect to that attribute, or violate other fairness constraints.

underfitting
Producing a model with poor predictive ability because the model hasn't captured the complexity of the training data. Many problems can cause underfitting, including:

Training on the wrong set of features.
Training for too few epochs or at too low a learning rate.
Training with too high a regularization rate.
Providing too few hidden layers in a deep neural network.
unlabeled example
An example that contains features but no label. Unlabeled examples are the input to inference. In semi-supervised and unsupervised learning, unlabeled examples are used during training.

unsupervised machine learning
#clustering
Training a model to find patterns in a dataset, typically an unlabeled dataset.

The most common use of unsupervised machine learning is to cluster data into groups of similar examples. For example, an unsupervised machine learning algorithm can cluster songs together based on various properties of the music. The resulting clusters can become an input to other machine learning algorithms (for example, to a music recommendation service). Clustering can be helpful in domains where true labels are hard to obtain. For example, in domains such as anti-abuse and fraud, clusters can help humans better understand the data.

Another example of unsupervised machine learning is principal component analysis (PCA). For example, applying PCA on a dataset containing the contents of millions of shopping carts might reveal that shopping carts containing lemons frequently also contain antacids.

Compare with supervised machine learning.

upweighting
Applying a weight to the downsampled class equal to the factor by which you downsampled.

user matrix
#recsystems
In recommendation systems, an embedding generated by matrix factorization that holds latent signals about user preferences. Each row of the user matrix holds information about the relative strength of various latent signals for a single user. For example, consider a movie recommendation system. In this system, the latent signals in the user matrix might represent each user's interest in particular genres, or might be harder-to-interpret signals that involve complex interactions across multiple factors.

The user matrix has a column for each latent feature and a row for each user. That is, the user matrix has the same number of rows as the target matrix that is being factorized. For example, given a movie recommendation system for 1,000,000 users, the user matrix will have 1,000,000 rows.

V
validation
A process used, as part of training, to evaluate the quality of a machine learning model using the validation set. Because the validation set is disjoint from the training set, validation helps ensure that the model’s performance generalizes beyond the training set.

Contrast with test set.

validation set
A subset of the dataset—disjoint from the training set—used in validation.

Contrast with training set and test set.

vanishing gradient problem
#seq
The tendency for the gradients of early hidden layers of some deep neural networks to become surprisingly flat (low). Increasingly lower gradients result in increasingly smaller changes to the weights on nodes in a deep neural network, leading to little or no learning. Models suffering from the vanishing gradient problem become difficult or impossible to train. Long Short-Term Memory cells address this issue.

Compare to exploding gradient problem.

W
Wasserstein loss
One of the loss functions commonly used in generative adversarial networks, based on the earth-mover's distance between the distribution of generated data and real data.

Wasserstein Loss is the default loss function in TF-GAN.

weight
A coefficient for a feature in a linear model, or an edge in a deep network. The goal of training a linear model is to determine the ideal weight for each feature. If a weight is 0, then its corresponding feature does not contribute to the model.

Weighted Alternating Least Squares (WALS)
#recsystems
An algorithm for minimizing the objective function during matrix factorization in recommendation systems, which allows a downweighting of the missing examples. WALS minimizes the weighted squared error between the original matrix and the reconstruction by alternating between fixing the row factorization and column factorization. Each of these optimizations can be solved by least squares convex optimization. For details, see the Recommendation Systems course

wide model
A linear model that typically has many sparse input features. We refer to it as "wide" since such a model is a special type of neural network with a large number of inputs that connect directly to the output node. Wide models are often easier to debug and inspect than deep models. Although wide models cannot express nonlinearities through hidden layers, they can use transformations such as feature crossing and bucketization to model nonlinearities in different ways.
Contrast with deep model.

Word
Description
Accuracy	Accuracy is a metric by which one can examine how good is the machine learning model. Let us look at the confusion matrix to understand it in a better way:


So, the accuracy is the ratio of correctly predicted classes to the total classes predicted. Here, the accuracy will be:



Adam Optimization	The Adam Optimization algorithm is used in training deep learning models. It is an extension to Stochastic Gradient Descent. In this optimization algorithm, running averages of both the gradients and the second moments of the gradients are used. It is used to compute adaptive learning rates for each parameter.
Features:

It is computationally efficient and has little memory requirements
It is invariant to diagonal rescaling of the gradients
Adam works well in practice as compared to other stochastic optimization methods
Apache Spark	Apache Spark is an open-source cluster computing framework. Spark can be deployed in a variety of ways, provides native bindings for the Java, Scala, Python, and R programming languages, and supports SQL, streaming data, and machine learning. Some of the key features of Apache Spark are listed below:
Speed − Spark helps to run an application in Hadoop cluster, up to 100 times faster in memory, and 10 times faster when running on disk
Spark supports popular data science programming languages such as R, Python, and Scala
Spark also has a library called MLlIB which includes basic machine learning including classification, regression, and clustering
Autoregression	Autoregression is a time series model that uses observations from previous time steps as input to a regression equation to predict the value at the next time step. The autoregressive model specifies that the output variable depends linearly on its own previous values. In this technique input variables are taken as observations at previous time steps, called lag variables.
For example, we can predict the value for the next time step (t+1) given the observations at the last two time steps (t-1 and t-2). As a regression model, this would look as follows:

X(t+1) = b0 + b1*X(t-1) + b2*X(t-2)

Since the regression model uses data from the same input variable at previous time steps, it is referred to as an autoregression.

 

B
[su_table]

 

Word
Description
Backpropogation	In neural networks, if the estimated output is far away from the actual output (high error), we update the biases and weights based on the error. This weight and bias updating process is known as Back Propagation. Back-propagation (BP) algorithms work by determining the loss (or error) at the output and then propagating it back into the network. The weights are updated to minimize the error resulting from each neuron. The first step in minimizing the error is to determine the gradient (Derivatives) of each node w.r.t. the final output.
Bagging	Bagging or bootstrap averaging is a technique where multiple models are created on the subset of data, and the final predictions are determined by combining the predictions of all the models. Some of the algorithms that use bagging technique are :
Bagging meta-estimator
Random Forest


Bar Chart	Bar charts are a type of graph that are used to display and compare the numbers, frequency or other measures (e.g. mean) for different discrete categories of data. They are used for categorical variables. Simple example of a bar chart:


To gain a better understanding about bar charts, refer here.

Bayes Theorem	
Bayes’ theorem is used to calculate the conditional probability. Conditional probability is the probability of an event ‘B’ occurring given the related event ‘A’ has already occurred.

For example, Let’s say a clinic wants to cure cancer of the patients visiting the clinic.

A represents an event “Person has cancer”

B represents an event “Person is a smoker”

The clinic wishes to calculate the proportion of smokers from the ones diagnosed with cancer.

To do so use the Bayes’ Theorem (also known as Bayes’ rule) which is as follows:
bayes' theoremTo understand Bayes’ Theorem in detail, refer here.

Bayesian Statistics	Bayesian statistics is a mathematical procedure that applies probabilities to statistical problems. It provides people the tools to update their beliefs in the evidence of new data. It differs from classical frequentist approach and is based on the use of Bayesian probabilities to summarize evidence. For more details, read here.
Bias-Variance Trade-off	The error emerging from any model can be broken down into components mathematically.
Following are these component :

Bias error is useful to quantify how much on an average are the predicted values different from the actual value
Variance on the other side quantifies how are the prediction made on same observation different from each other


A high bias error means we have a under-performing model which keeps on missing important trends. A high variance model will over-fit on your training population and perform badly on any observation beyond training. In order to have a perfect fit in the model, the bias and variance should be balanced which is bias variance trade off.

Big Data	Big data is a term that describes the large volume of data – both structured and unstructured. But it’s not the amount of data that’s important. It’s how organizations use this large amount of data to generate insights. Companies use various tools, techniques and resources to make sense of this data to derive effective business strategies.
Binary Variable	Binary variables are those variables which can have only two unique values. For example, a variable “Smoking Habit” can contain only two values like “Yes” and “No”.
Binomial Distribution	
Binomial Distribution is applied only on discrete random variables. It is a method of calculating probabilities for experiments having fixed number of trials.

Binomial distribution has following properties:

The experiment should have finite number of trials
There should be two outcomes in a trial: success and failure
Trials are independent
Probability of success (p) remains constant
For a distribution to qualifying as binomial, all of the properties must be satisfied.

So, which kind of distributions would be considered binomial? Let’s answer it using few examples:

Suppose, you need to find the probability of scoring bull’s eye on a dart. Can it be called as binomial distribution? No, because the number of trials isn’t fixed. I could hit the bull’s eye on the 1st attempt or 3rd attempt or I might not be able to hit it at all. Therefore, trials aren’t fixed.
A football match can have resulted in 3 ways: Win, Lose or Draw. Thus, if we are asked to find the probability of winning in this case, binomial distribution cannot be used because there are more than two outcomes.
Tossing a fair coin 20 times is a case of binomial distribution as here we have finite number of trials 20 with only two outcomes “Head” or “Tail”. These trials are independent and probability of success is 1/2 across all trials.
The formula to calculate probability using Binomial Distribution is:

P ( X = r ) = nCr (pˆr)* (1-p) * (n-r)

where:
n : No. of trials
r : No. of success
p : the probability of success
1 – p : Probability of failure
nCr : binomial coefficient given by n!/k!(n-k)!

Boosting	Boosting is a sequential process, where each subsequent model attempts to correct the errors of the previous model. The succeeding models are dependent on the previous model. Some of the boosting algorithms are:
AdaBoost
GBM
XGBM
LightGBM
CatBoost
To learn more about boosting algorithms, refer here.

Bootstrapping	Bootstrapping is the process of dividing the dataset into multiple subsets, with replacement. Each subset is of the same size of the dataset. These samples are called bootstrap samples.
Box Plot	It displays the full range of variation (from min to max), the likely range of variation (the Interquartile range), and a typical value (the median). Below is a visualization of a box plot:


Some of the inferences that can be made from a box plot:

Median: Middle quartile marks the median.
Middle box represents the 50% of the data
First quartile: 25% of data falls below these line
Third quartile: 75% of data falls below these line.
Business Analytics	Business analytics is mainly used to show the practical methodology followed by an organization for exploring data to gain insights. The methodology focusses on statistical analysis of the data.
Business Intelligence	Business intelligence are a set of strategies, applications, data, technologies used by an organization for data collection, analysis and generating insights to derive strategic business opportunities.
[/su_table]

 

C
[su_table]

 

Word
Description
 Categorical Variable	 Categorical variables (or nominal variables) are those variables which have discrete qualitative values. For example, names of cities are categorical like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata. Read in detail  here.
 Classification	 It is supervised learning method where the output variable is a category, such as “Male” or “Female” or “Yes” and “No”.
For example: Classification Algorithms like Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, K-NN, SVM etc.

 Classification Threshold	Classification threshold is the value which is used to classify a new observation as 1 or 0. When we get an output as probabilities and have to classify them into classes, we decide some threshold value and if the probability is above that threshold value we classify it as 1, and 0 otherwise. To find the optimal threshold value, one can plot the AUC-ROC and keep changing the threshold value. The value which will give the maximum AUC will be the optimal threshold value.
Clustering	
Clustering is an unsupervised learning method used to discover the inherent groupings in the data.  For example: Grouping customers on the basis of their purchasing behaviour which is further used to segment the customers. And then the companies can use the appropriate marketing tactics to generate more profits.

Example of clustering algorithms: K-Means, hierarchical clustering, etc.

Computer Vision	Computer Vision is a field of computer science that deals with enabling computers to visualize, process and identify images/videos in the same way that a human vision does. In the recent times, the major driving forces behind Computer Vision has been the emergence of deep learning, rise in computational power and a huge amount of image data. The image data can take many forms, such as video sequences, views from multiple cameras, or multi-dimensional data from a medical scanner. Some of the key applications of Computer Vision are:
Pedestrians, cars, road detection in smart (self-driving) cars
Object recognition
Object tracking
Motion analysis
Image restoration
Concordant-Discordant Ratio	Concordant and discordant pairs are used to describe the relationship between pairs of observations. To calculate the concordant and discordant pairs, the data are treated as ordinal. The number of concordant and discordant pairs are used in calculations for Kendall’s tau, which measures the association between two ordinal variables.
Let’s say you had two movie reviewers rank a set of 5 movies:

Movie	Reviewer 1	Reviewer 2
A	1	1
B	2	2
C	3	4
D	4	3
E	5	6
The ranks given by the reviewer 1 are ordered in ascending order, this way we can compare the rankings given by both the reviewers.

Concordant Pair – 2 entities would form a concordant pair if one of them is ranked higher than the other consistently. For example, in the table above B and D form a concordant pair because B has been ranked higher than D by both the reviewers.

Discordant Pair – C and D are discordant because they have been ranked in opposite order by the reviewers.

Concordant Pair or Discordant Pair ratio = (No. of concordant or discordant pairs) / (Total pairs tested)

Confidence Interval	A confidence interval is used to estimate what percent of a population fits a category based on the results from a sample population. For example, if 70 adults own a cell phone in a random sample of 100 adults, we can be fairly confident that the true percentage amongst the population is somewhere between 61% and 79%. Read more here.
Confusion Matrix
A confusion matrix is a table that is often used to describe the performance of a classification model. It is a N * N matrix, where N is the number of classes. We form confusion matrix between prediction of model classes Vs actual classes. The 2nd quadrant is called type II error or False Negatives, whereas 3rd quadrant is called type I error or False positives


Continuous Variable	Continuous variables are those variables which can have infinite number of values but only in a specific range. For example, height is a continuous variable. Read more here.
Convergence	Convergence refers to moving towards union or uniformity. An iterative algorithm is said to converge when as the iterations proceed the output gets closer and closer to a specific value.
Convex Function	A real value function is called convex if the line segment between any two points on the graph of the function lies above or on the graph.


Convex functions play an important role in many areas of mathematics. They are especially important in the study of optimization problems where they are distinguished by a number of convenient properties.

Correlation	Correlation is the ratio of covariance of two variables to a product of variance (of the variables). It takes a value between +1 and -1. An extreme value on both the side means they are strongly correlated with each other. A value of zero indicates a NIL correlation but not a non-dependence. You’ll understand this clearly in one of the following answers.
The most widely used correlation coefficient is Pearson Coefficient. Here is the mathematical formula to derive Pearson Coefficient.



Cosine Similarity	Cosine Similarity is the cosine of the angle between 2 non-zero vectors. Two parallel vectors have a cosine similarity of 1 and two vectors at 90° have a cosine similarity of 0. Suppose we have two vectors A and B, cosine similarity of these vectors can be calculated by dividing the dot product of A and B with the product of the magnitude of the two vectors.


Cost Function	Cost function is used to define and measure the error of the model. The cost function is given by:


Here,

h(x) is the prediction
y is the actual value
m is the number of rows in the training set
Let us understand it with an example:

So let’s say, you increase the size of a particular shop, where you predicted that the sales would be higher. But despite increasing the size, the sales in that shop did not increase that much. So the cost applied in increasing the size of the shop, gave you negative results. So, we need to minimize these costs. Therefore we make use of cost function to minimize the loss.

Covariance	Covariance is a measure of the joint variability of two random variables. It’s similar to variance, but where variance tells you how a single variable varies, co variance tells you how two variables vary together. The formula for covariance is:


Where,

x = the independent variable

y = the dependent variable

n = number of data points in the sample

x bar = the mean of the independent variable x

y bar = the mean of the dependent variable y

A positive covariance means the variables are positively related, while a negative covariance means the variables are inversely related.

Cross Entropy	In information theory, the cross entropy between two probability distributions and over the same underlying set of events measures the average number of bits needed to identify an event drawn from the set, if a coding scheme is used that is optimized for an “unnatural” probability distribution , rather than the “true”. Cross entropy can be used to define the loss function in machine learning and optimization.
Cross Validation	Cross Validation is a technique which involves reserving a particular sample of a dataset which is not used to train the model. Later, the model is tested on this sample to evaluate the performance. There are various methods of performing cross validation such as:
Leave one out cross validation (LOOCV)
k-fold cross validation
Stratified k-fold cross validation
Adversarial validation
[/su_table]

 

D
[su_table] 

 

Word
Description
Data Mining	Data mining is a study of extracting useful information from structured/unstructured data taken from various sources. This is done usually for
Mining for frequent patterns
Mining for associations
Mining for correlations
Mining for clusters
Mining for predictive analysis
Data Mining is done for purposes like Market Analysis, determining customer purchase pattern, financial planning, fraud detection, etc

Data Science	Data science is a combination of data analysis, algorithmic development and technology in order to solve analytical problems. The main goal is a use of data to generate business value.
Data Transformation
Data transformation is the process to convert data from one form to the other. This is usually done at a preprocessing step.
For instance, replacing a variable x by the square root of x

 

X	SQUARE_ROOT(X)
1	1
4	2
9	3
 



Database	Database (abbreviated as DB) is an structured collection of data. The collected information is organised in a way such that it is easily accessible by the computer. Databases are built and managed by using database programming languages. The most common database language is SQL.
Dataframe	DataFrame is a 2-dimensional labeled data structure with columns of potentially different types. You can think of it like a spreadsheet or SQL table, or a dict of Series objects. DataFrame accepts many different kinds of input:
Dict of 1D ndarrays, lists, dicts, or Series
2-D numpy.ndarray
Structured or record ndarray
A series
Another DataFrame
Dataset	A dataset (or data set) is a collection of data. A dataset is organized into some type of data structure. In a database, for example, a dataset might contain a collection of business data (names, salaries, contact information, sales figures, and so forth). Several characteristics define a dataset’s structure and properties. These include the number and types of the attributes or variables, and various statistical measures applicable to them, such as standard deviation and kurtosis.
Dashboard	Dashboard is an information management tool which is used to visually track, analyze and display key performance indicators, metrics and key data points. Dashboards can be customised to fulfil the requirements of a project. It can be used to connect files, attachments, services and APIs which is displayed in the form of tables, line charts, bar charts and gauges. Popular tools for building dashboards include Excel and Tableau.
DBScan	DBSCAN is the acronym for Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise. It is a clustering algorithm that isolates different density regions by forming clusters. For a given set of points, it groups the points which are closely packed.
The algorithm has two important features:

distance
the minimum number of points required to form a dense region
The steps involved in this algorithm are:

Beginning with an arbitrary starting point it extracts the neighborhood of this point using the distance
If there are sufficient neighboring points around this point then a cluster is formed
This point is then marked as visited
A new unvisited point is retrieved and processed, leading to the discovery of a further cluster or noise
This process continues until all points are marked as visited
The below image is an example of DBScan on a set of normalized data points:



 

Decision Boundary	In a statistical-classification problem with two or more classes, a decision boundary or decision surface is a hypersurface that partitions the underlying vector space into two or more sets, one for each class. How well the classifier works depends upon how closely the input patterns to be classified resemble the decision boundary. In the example sketched below, the correspondence is very close, and one can anticipate excellent performance.


Here the lines separating each class are decision boundaries.

Decision Tree	
Decision tree is a type of supervised learning algorithm (having a pre-defined target variable) that is mostly used in classification problems. It works for both categorical and continuous input & output variables. In this technique, we split the population (or sample) into two or more homogeneous sets (or sub-populations) based on most significant splitter / differentiator in input variables.

Decision tree - machine learning

Read more here.

 Deep Learning	Deep Learning is associated with a machine learning algorithm (Artificial Neural Network, ANN) which uses the concept of human brain to facilitate the modeling of arbitrary functions. ANN requires a vast amount of data and this algorithm is highly flexible when it comes to model multiple outputs simultaneously. To understand ANN in detail, read here.
Descriptive Statistics	Descriptive statistics is comprised of those values which explains the spread and central tendency of data. For example, mean is a way to represent central tendency of the data, whereas IQR is a way to represent spread of the data.
Dependent Variable	A dependent variable is what you measure and which is affected by independent / input variable(s). It is called dependent because it “depends” on the independent variable. For example, let’s say we want to predict the smoking habits of people. Then the person smokes “yes” or “no” is the dependent variable.
 Decile	Decile divides a series into 10 equal parts. For any series, there are 10 decile denoted by D1, D2, D3 … D10. These are known as First Decile , Second Decile and so on.
For example, the diagram below shows the health score of a patient from range 0 to 60. Nine deciles split the patients into 10 groups

Decile - statistics

Degree of Freedom	It is the number of variables that have the choice of having more than one arbitrary value.
For example, in a sample of size 10 with mean 10, 9 values can be arbitrary but the 10th value is forced by the sample mean. So, we can choose any number for 9 values but the 10th value must be such that the mean is 10. So, the degree of freedom in this case will be 9.

Dimensionality Reduction	Dimensionality Reduction is the process of reducing the number of random variables under consideration by obtaining a set of principal variables. Dimension Reduction refers to the process of converting a set of data having vast dimensions into data with lesser dimensions ensuring that it conveys similar information concisely. Some of the benefits of dimensionality reduction:
It helps in data compressing and reducing the storage space required
It fastens the time required for performing same computations
It takes care of multicollinearity that improves the model performance. It removes redundant features
Reducing the dimensions of data to 2D or 3D may allow us to plot and visualize it precisely
It is helpful in noise removal also and as result of that we can improve the performance of models
Dplyr	Dplyr is a popular data manipulation package in R. It makes data manipulation, cleaning, summarizing very user friendly. Dplyr can work not only with the local datasets, but also with remote database tables, using exactly the same R code.
It can be easily installed using the following code from the R console:

install.packages("dplyr")
Dummy Variable	Dummy Variable is another name for Boolean variable. An example of dummy variable is that it takes value 0 or 1. 0 means value is true (i.e. age < 25) and 1 means value is false (i.e. age >= 25)
[/su_table]


E
[su_table]

Word
Description
Early Stopping	Early stopping is a technique for avoiding overfitting when training a machine learning model with iterative method. We set the early stopping in such a way that when the performance has stopped improving on the held-out validation set, the model training stops.
For example, in XGBoost, as you train more and more trees, you will overfit your training dataset. Early stopping enables you to specify a validation dataset and the number of iterations after which the algorithm should stop if the score on your validation dataset didn’t increase.

EDA	EDA or exploratory data analysis is a phase used for data science pipeline in which the focus is to understand insights of the data through visualization or by statistical analysis.
The steps involved in EDA are:

Variable IdentificationIn this step, we identify the data type and category of variables

Univariate analysis
Multivariate analysis
Refer here for a comprehensive guide to doing EDA.

ETL	ETL is the acronym for Extract, Transform and Load. An ETL system has the following properties:
It extracts data from the source systems
It enforces data quality and consistency standards
Delivers data in a presentation-ready format
This data can be used by application developers to build applications and end users for making decisions.

Evaluation Metrics`
The purpose of evaluation metric is to measure the quality of the statistical / machine learning model. For example, below are a few evaluation metrics
AUC
ROC score
F-Score
Log-Loss
[/su_table]

 

F
[su_table]

Word
Description
Factor Analysis	Factor analysis is a technique that is used to reduce a large number of variables into fewer numbers of factors. Factor analysis aims to find independent latent variables. Factor analysis also assumes several assumptions:
There is linear relationship
There is no multicollinearity
It includes relevant variables into analysis
There is true correlation between variables and factors
There are different types of methods used to extract the factor from the data set:

Principal Component Analysis
Common factor analysis
Image factoring
Maximum likelihood method
False Negative	Points which are actually true but are incorrectly predicted as false. For example, if the problem is to predict the loan status. (Y-loan approved, N-loan not approved). False negative in this case will be the samples for which loan was approved but the model predicted the status as not approved.
False Positive	Points which are actually false but are incorrectly predicted as true. For example, if the problem is to predict the loan status. (Y-loan approved, N-loan not approved). False positive in this case will be the samples for which loan was not approved but the model predicted the status as approved.
Feature Hashing
It is a method to transform features to vector. Without looking up the indices in an associative array, it applies a hash function to the features and uses their hash values as indices directly. Simple example of feature hashing:
Suppose we have three documents:

John likes to watch movies.
Mary likes movies too.
John also likes football.
Now we can convert this to vector using hashing.

Term	Index
John	1
likes	2
to	3
watch	4
movies	5
Mary	6
too	7
also	8
football	9
The array form for the same will be:



Feature Reduction	Feature reduction is the process of reducing the number of features to work on a computation intensive task without losing a lot of information.
PCA is one of the most popular feature reduction techniques, where we combine correlated variables to reduce the features.



Feature Selection
Feature Selection is a process of choosing those features which are required to explain the predictive power of a statistical model and dropping out irrelevant features.
This can be done by either filtering out less useful features or by combining features to make a new one.



Refer here.

Few-shot Learning
Few-shot learning refers to the training of machine learning algorithms using a very small set of training data instead of a very large set. This is most suitable in the field of computer vision, where it is desirable to have an object categorization model work well without thousands of training examples.
Flume	Flume is a service designed for streaming logs into the Hadoop environment. It can collect and aggregate huge amounts of log data from a variety of sources. In order to collect high volume of data, multiple flume agents can be configured.
Here are the major features of Apache Flume:

Flume is a flexible tool as it allows to scale in environments with as low as five machines to as high as several thousands of machines
Apache Flume provides high throughput and low latency
Apache Flume has a declarative configuration but provides ease of extensibility
Flume in Hadoop is fault tolerant, linearly scalable and stream oriented
Frequentist Statistics	
Frequentist Statistics tests whether an event (hypothesis) occurs or not. It calculates the probability of an event in the long run of the experiment (i.e the experiment is repeated under the same conditions to obtain the outcome).

Here, the sampling distributions of fixed size are taken. Then, the experiment is theoretically repeated infinite number of times but practically done with a stopping intention. For example, I perform an experiment with a stopping intention in mind that I will stop the experiment when it is repeated 1000 times or I see minimum 300 heads in a coin toss. Read more here.

F-Score	F-score evaluation metric combines both precision and recall as a measure of effectiveness of classification. It is calculated in terms of ratio of weighted importance on either recall or precision as determined by β coefficient.
F measure = 2 x (Recall × Precision) / ( β² × Recall + Precision )

[/su_table]


G
[su_table]

 

 

 

Word
Description
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)	The GRU is a variant of the LSTM (Long Short Term Memory) and was introduced by K. Cho. It retains the LSTM’s resistance to the vanishing gradient problem, but because of its simpler internal structure it is faster to train.
Instead of the input, forget, and output gates in the LSTM cell, the GRU cell has only two gates, an update gate z, and a reset gate r. The update gate defines how much previous memory to keep, and the reset gate defines how to combine the new input with the previous memory.



Ggplot2	GGplot2 is a data visualization package for the R programming language. It is a highly versatile and user-friendly tool for creating attractive plots. To know more about Ggplot2, visit here.
It can be easily installed using the following code from the R console:

install.packages("ggplot2")
Go	Go is an open source programming language that makes it easy to build simple, reliable, and efficient software. Go is a statically typed language in the tradition of C.
The main features of Go are:

Memory safety
Garbage collection
Structural typing
The compiler and other tools originally developed by Google are all free and open source. To read further on the Go language, refer here.

Goodness of Fit	The goodness of fit of a model describes how well it fits a set of observations. Measures of goodness of fit typically summarize the discrepancy between observed values and the values expected under the model.
With regard to a machine learning algorithm, a good fit is when the error for the model on the training data as well as the test data is minimum. Over time, as the algorithm learns, the error for the model on the training data goes down and so does the error on the test dataset. If we train for too long, the performance on the training dataset may continue to decrease because the model is overfitting and learning the irrelevant detail and noise in the training dataset. At the same time the error for the test set starts to rise again as the model’s ability to generalize decreases.

So the point just before the error on the test dataset starts to increase where the model has good skill on both the training dataset and the unseen test dataset is known as the good fit of the model.

Gradient Descent	Gradient descent is a first-order iterative optimization algorithm for finding the minimum of a function. In machine learning algorithms, we use gradient descent to minimize the cost function. It find out the best set of parameters for our algorithm. Gradient Descent can be classified as follows:
On the basis of data ingestion:
Full Batch Gradient Descent Algorithm
Stochastic Gradient Descent Algorithm
In full batch gradient descent algorithms, we use whole data at once to compute the gradient, whereas in stochastic we take a sample while computing the gradient.

On the basis of differentiation techniques:
First order Differentiation
Second order Differentiation
[/su_table]

 

H
[su_table]

 

 

 

Word
Description
Hadoop	Hadoop is an open source distributed processing framework used when we have to deal with enormous data. It allows us to use parallel processing capability to handle big data. Here are some significant benefits of Hadoop:
Hadoop clusters work and keeps multiple copies to ensure reliability of data. A maximum of 4500 machines can be connected together using Hadoop
The whole process is broken down into pieces and executed in parallel, hence saving time. A maximum of 25 Petabyte (1 PB = 1000 TB) data can be processed using Hadoop
In case of a long query, Hadoop builds back up data-sets at every level. It also executes query on duplicate datasets to avoid process loss in case of individual failure. These steps makes Hadoop processing more precise and accurate
Queries in Hadoop are as simple as coding in any language. You just need to change the way of thinking around building a query to enable parallel processing
Hidden Markov Model	Hidden Markov Process is a Markov process in which the states are invisible or hidden, and the model developed to estimate these hidden states is known as the Hidden Markov Model (HMM). However, the output (data) dependent on the hidden states is visible. This output data generated by HMM gives some cue about the sequence of states.
HMM are widely used for pattern recognition in speech recognition, part-of-speech tagging, handwriting recognition, and reinforcement learning.

Hierarchical Clustering	
Hierarchical clustering, as the name suggests is an algorithm that builds hierarchy of clusters. This algorithm starts with all the data points assigned to a cluster of their own. Then two nearest clusters are merged into the same cluster. In the end, this algorithm terminates when there is only a single cluster left.

The results of hierarchical clustering can be shown using dendrogram. The dendrogram can be interpreted as:

 

Read more here.

 Histogram	Histogram is one of the methods for visualizing data distribution of continuous variables. For example, the figure below shows a histogram with age along the x-axis and frequency of the variable (count of passengers) along the y-axis.


Histograms are widely used to determine the skewness of the data. Looking at the tail of the plot, you can find whether the data distribution is left skewed, normal or right skewed.



Hive	Hive is a data warehouse software project to process structured data in Hadoop. It is built on top of Apache Hadoop for providing data summarization, query and analysis. Hive gives an SQL-like interface to query data stored in various databases and file systems that integrate with Hadoop. Some of the key features of Hive are :
Indexing to provide acceleration
Different storage types such as plain text, RDFile, HBase, ORC, and others
Metadata storage in a relational database management system, significantly reducing the time to perform semantic checks during query execution
Operating on compressed data stored into the Hadoop ecosystem
For detailed information, refer here.

Holdout Sample	While working on the dataset, a small part of the dataset is not used for training the model instead, it is used to check the performance of the model. This part of the dataset is called the holdout sample.
For instance, if I divide my data in two parts – 7:3 and use the 70% to train the model, and other 30% to check the performance of my model, the 30% data is called the holdout sample.

Holt-Winters Forecasting	Holt-Winters is one of the most popular forecasting techniques for time series. The model predicts the future values computing the combined effects of both trend and seasonality. The idea behind Holt’s Winter forecasting is to apply exponential smoothing to the seasonal components in addition to level and trend.
Visit here for more details.

Hyperparameter	A hyperparameter is a parameter whose value is set before training a machine learning or deep learning model. Different models require different hyperparameters and some require none. Hyperparameters should not be confused with the parameters of the model because the parameters are estimated or learned from the data.
Some keys points about the hyperparameters are:

They are often used in processes to help estimate model parameters.
They are often manually set.
They are often tuned to tweak a model’s performance
Number of trees in a Random Forest, eta in XGBoost, and k in k-nearest neighbours are some examples of hyperparameters.

Hyperplane	It is a subspace with one fewer dimensions than its surrounding area. If a space is 3-dimensional then its hyperplane is just a normal 2D plane. In 5 dimensional space, it’s a 4D plane, so on and so forth.
Most of the time it’s basically a normal plane, but in some special cases, like in Support Vector Machines, where classifications are performed with an n-dimensional hyperplane, the n can be quite large.

Hypothesis	Simply put, a hypothesis is a possible view or assertion of an analyst about the problem he or she is working upon. It may be true or may not be true.  Read more here.
[/su_table]

 

I
[su_table]

 

Word
Description
Imputation	Imputation is a technique used for handling missing values in the data. This is done either by statistical metrics like mean/mode imputation or by machine learning techniques like kNN imputation
 

For example,

If the data is as below

Name	Age
Akshay	23
Akshat	NA
Viraj	40
 

The second row contains a missing value, so to impute it we use mean of all ages, i.e.

Name	Age
Akshay	23
Akshat	31.5
Viraj	40
Inferential Statistics	In inferential statistics, we try to hypothesize about the population by only looking at a sample of it. For example, before releasing a drug in the market, internal tests are done to check if the drug is viable for release. But here we cannot check with the whole population for viability of the drug, so we do it on a sample which best represents the population.
IQR	IQR (or interquartile range) is a measure of variability based on dividing the rank-ordered data set into four equal parts. It can be derived by Quartile3 – Quartile1.
IQR - statistics

Iteration	Iteration refers to the number of times an algorithm’s parameters are updated while training a model on a dataset. For example, each iteration of training a neural network takes certain number of training data and updates the weights by using gradient descent or some other weight update rule.
[/su_table]


J
[su_table]

 

Word
Description
Julia	Julia is a high-level, high-performance dynamic programming language for numerical computing. Some important features of Julia are:
Multiple dispatch: providing the ability to define function behavior across many combinations of argument types.
Good performance, approaching that of statically-compiled languages like C
Built-in package manager
Designed for parallelism and distributed computation
Free and open source
[/su_table]

 

K
[su_table]

Word
Description
K-Means	
It is a type of unsupervised algorithm which solves the clustering problem. It is a procedure which follows a simple and easy way to classify a given data set through a certain number of clusters (assume k clusters). Data points inside a cluster are homogeneous and heterogeneous to peer groups.

k means clustering - unsupervised learning

Keras	Keras is a simple, high-level neural network library, written in Python. It is capable of running on top of Tensorflow and Theano. This is done to make design and experiments with Neural Networks easier.
Following are some important features of Keras:

User friendliness
Modularity
Easy extensibility
Work with Python
kNN	
K nearest neighbors is a simple algorithm that stores all available cases and classifies new cases by a majority vote of its k neighbors. The case being assigned to the class is most common amongst its K nearest neighbors measured by a distance function.

These distance functions can be Euclidean, Manhattan, Minkowski and Hamming distance. First three functions are used for continuous function and fourth one (Hamming) for categorical variables. If K = 1, then the case is simply assigned to the class of its nearest neighbor. At times, choosing the value for K can be a challenge while performing KNN modeling.

 

KNN algorithm

Read more here.
Kurtosis	
Kurtosis is defined as the thickness (or heaviness) of the tails of a given distribution. Depending on the value of kurtosis, it can be classified into the below 3 categories:

Mesokurtic: The distribution with kurtosis value equal to 3. A random variable which follows a normal distribution has a kurtosis value of 3
Platykurtic: If the kurtosis is less than 3. In this, the given distribution has thinner tails and a lower peak than a normal distribution
Leptykurtic: When the kurtosis value is greater than 3. In this, the given distribution has fatter tails and a higher peak than a normal distribution


[/su_table]

 

L
[su_table]

 

 

Word
Description
Labeled Data	A labeled dataset has a meaningful “label”, “class” or “tag” associated with each of its records or rows. For example, labels for a dataset of a set of images might be whether an image contains a cat or a dog.
Labeled data are usually more expensive to obtain than the raw unlabeled data because preparation of the labelled data involves manual labelling every piece of unlabeled data.

Labeled data is required for supervised learning algorithms.

Lasso Regression	
Lasso regression performs L1 regularization, i.e. it adds a factor of sum of absolute value of coefficients in the optimization objective. Thus, lasso regression optimizes the following:

Objective = RSS + α * (sum of absolute value of coefficients)
Here, α (alpha) works similar to that of ridge and provides a trade-off between balancing RSS and magnitude of coefficients. Like that of ridge, α can take various values. Let’s iterate it briefly here:

α = 0 : Same coefficients as simple linear regression
α = ∞ : All coefficients zero (same logic as before)
0 < α < ∞ : coefficients between 0 and that of simple linear regression
Line Chart	Line charts are used to display information as series of points connected by straight line segment. These charts are used to communicate information visually, such as to show an increase or decrease in the trend in data over intervals of time.
In the plot below, for each time instance, the speed trend is shown and the points are connected to display the trend over time.



This plot is for a single case. Line charts can also be used to compare changes over the same period of time for multiple cases, like plotting the speed of a cycle, car, train over time in the same plot.

Linear Regression	
The best way to understand linear regression is to relive this experience of childhood. Let us say, you ask a child in fifth grade to arrange people in his class by increasing order of weight, without asking them their weight! What do you think the child will do? He / she would likely look (visually analyze) at the height and build of people and arrange them using a combination of these visible parameters. This is linear regression in real life. The child has actually figured out that height and build would be correlated to the weight by a relationship, which looks like the equation below.

Y=aX+b

where:

Y – Dependent Variable
a – Slope
X – Independent variable
b – Intercept
These coefficients a and b are derived based on minimizing the sum of squared difference of distance between data points and regression line.

Look at the below example. Here we have identified the best fit line having linear equation y=0.2811x+13.9. Now using this equation, we can find the weight, knowing the height of a person.

Linear Regression - statistics

Log Loss	Log Loss or Logistic loss is one of the evaluation metrics used to find how good the model is. Lower the log loss, better is the model. Log loss is the logarithm of the product of all probabilities.
Mathematically, log loss for two classes is defined as:



where, y is the class label and p is the predicted probability.

Logistic Regression	In simple words, it predicts the probability of occurrence of an event by fitting data to a logistic function. Hence, it is also known as logistic regression. Since, it predicts the probability, the  output values lies between 0 and 1 (as expected).
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)	Long short-term memory (LSTM) units (or blocks) are a building unit for layers of a recurrent neural network (RNN). A common LSTM unit is composed of a cell, an input gate, an output gate and a forget gate. The cell is responsible for “remembering” values over arbitrary time intervals, hence the word “memory” in LSTM. Each of the three gates can be thought of as a “conventional” artificial neuron, as in a multi-layer neural network, that is, they compute an activation (using an activation function) of a weighted sum. Applications of LSTM include:
Time series predictions
Speech recognition
Rhythm learning
Handwriting recognition
To learn further on LSTM, refer here.

[/su_table]

 

M
[su_table]

 

Word
Description
 Machine Learning	Machine Learning refers to the techniques involved in dealing with vast data in the most intelligent fashion (by developing algorithms) to derive actionable insights. In these techniques, we expect the algorithms to learn by itself wiithout being explicitly programmed.
Mahout	Mahout is an open source project from Apache that is used for creating scalable machine learning algorithms. It implements popular machine learning techniques such as recommendation, classification, clustering.
Features of Mahout:

Mahout offers a framework for doing data mining tasks on large volumes of data
Mahout lets applications to analyze large sets of data effectively and in quick time
It also offers distributed fitness function capabilities for evolutionary programming
It includes several MapReduce enabled clustering implementations such as k-means, fuzzy k-means, Dirichlet, and Mean-Shift
MapReduce	Hadoop MapReduce is a software framework for easily writing applications which process vast amounts of data (multi-terabyte data-sets) in-parallel on large clusters (thousands of nodes) of commodity hardware in a reliable, fault-tolerant manner.
A MapReduce framework is usually composed of three operations:

Map: each worker node applies the map function to the local data, and writes the output to a temporary storage. A master node ensures that only one copy of redundant input data is processed.
Shuffle: worker nodes redistribute data based on the output keys (produced by the map function), such that all data belonging to one key is located on the same worker node.
Reduce: worker nodes now process each group of output data, per key, in parallel.
To learn more about MapReduce, visit here.

Market Basket Analysis	Market Basket Analysis (also called as MBA) is a widely used technique among the Marketers to identify the best possible combinatory of the products or services which are frequently bought by the customers. This is also called product association analysis.Association analysis mostly done based on an algorithm named “Apriori Algorithm”. The Outcome of this analysis is called association rules. Marketers use these rules to strategize their recommendations.
When two or more products are purchased, Market Basket Analysis is done to check whether the purchase of one product increases the likelihood of the purchase of other products. This knowledge is a tool for the marketers to bundle the products or strategize a product cross sell to a customer.

Market Mix Modeling	Market Mix Modeling is an analytical approach that uses historical information like point of sales to quantify the impact of some of the components on sales.
Suppose the total sale is 100$, this total can be broken into sub components i.e. 60$ base sale, 20$ pricing, 18$ may be distribution and 2$ might be due to promotional activity. These numbers can be achieved using various logical methods. Every method can give a different break up. Hence, it becomes very important to standardize the process of breaking up the total sales into these components. This formal technique is formally known as MMM or Market Mix Modeling.

Maximum Likelihood Estimation	It is a method for finding the values of parameters which make the likelihood maximum. The resulting values are called maximum likelihood estimates (MLE).
Mean	For a dataset, mean is said to be the average value of all the numbers. It can sometimes be used as a representation of the whole data.
For instance, if you have the marks of students from a class, and you asked about how good is the class performing. It would be irrelevant to say the marks of every single student, instead, you can find the mean of the class, which will be a representative for class performance.
To find the mean, sum all the numbers and then divide by the number of items in the set.

For example, if the numbers are 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,8 then the mean would be 44/9 = 4.89.

Median	Median of a set of numbers is usually the middle value. When the total numbers in the set are even, the median will be the average of the two middle values. Median is used to measure the central tendency.
To calculate the median for a set of numbers, follow the below steps:

Arrange the numbers in ascending or descending order
Find the middle value, which will be n/2 (where n is the numbers in the set)
MIS	A management information system (MIS) is a computer system consisting of hardware and software that serves as the backbone of an organization’s operations. An MIS gathers data from multiple online systems, analyzes the information, and reports data to aid in management decision-making.
Objectives of MIS:

To improve decision-making, by providing up-to-date, accurate data on a variety of organizational assets
To correlate multiple data points in order to strategize ways to improve operations
ML-as-a-Service (MLaaS)	Machine learning as a service (MLaaS) is an array of services that provide machine learning tools as part of cloud computing services. This can include tools for data visualization, facial recognition, natural language processing, image recognition, predictive analytics, and deep learning. Some of the top ML-as-a-service providers are:
Microsoft Azure Machine Learning Studio
AWS Machine Learning
IBM Watson Machine Learning
Google Cloud Machine Learning Engine
BigML
Mode	Mode is the most frequent value occuring in the population. It is a metric to measure the central tendency, i.e. a way of expressing, in a (usually) single number, important information about a random variable or a population.
Mode can be calculated using following steps:

Count the number of time each value appears
Take the value which appears the most
Let us understand it with an example:

Suppose we have a dataset having 10 data points, listed below:

4,5,2,8,4,7,6,4,6,3

So now we will calculate the number of times each value has appeared.

Value	Count
2	1
3	1
4	3
5	1
6	2
7	1
8	1
So we see that the value 4 is repeating the most, i.e., 3 times. So, the mode of this dataset will be 4.

Model Selection	Model selection is the task of selecting a statistical model from a set of known models. Various methods that can be used for choosing the model are:
Exploratory Data Analysis
Scientific Methods
Some of the criteria for selecting the model can be:

Akaike Information Criterion (AIC)
Adjusted R2
Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC)
Likelihood ratio test
Monte Carlo Simluation	The idea behind Monte Carlo Simulation is to use random samples of parameters or inputs to explore the behavior of a complex process. Monte Carlo simulations sample from a probability distribution for each variable to produce hundreds or thousands of possible outcomes. The results are analyzed to get probabilities of different outcomes occurring.
Multi-Class Classification	Problems which have more than one class in the target variable are called multi-class Classification problems.
For example, if the target is to predict the quality of a product, which can be Excellent, good, average, fair, bad. In this case, the variable has 5 classes, hence it is a 5-class classification problem.

Multivariate Analysis	Multivariate analysis is a process of comparing and analyzing the dependency of multiple variables over each other.
For example, we can perform bivariate analysis of combination of two continuous features and find a relationship between them.



Multivariate Regression	Multivariate, as the word suggests, refers to ‘multiple dependent variables’. A regression model designed to deal with multiple dependent variables is called a multivariate regression model.
Consider the example – for a given set of details about a student’s interests, previous subject-wise score etc, you want to predict the GPA for all the semesters (GPA1, GPA2, …. ). This problem statement can be addressed using multivariate regression since we have more than one dependent variable.

[/su_table]

 

N
[su_table]

 

Word
Description
Naive Bayes	It is a classification technique based on Bayes’ theorem with an assumption of independence between predictors. In simple terms, a Naive Bayes classifier assumes that the presence of a particular feature in a class is unrelated to the presence of any other feature. For example, a fruit may be considered to be an apple if it is red, round and about 3 inches in diameter. Even if these features depend on each other or upon the existence of the other features, a naive Bayes classifier would consider all of these properties to independently contribute to the probability that this fruit is an apple.
NaN	NaN stands for ‘not a number’. It is a numeric data type value representing an undefined or unrepresentable value. If the dataset has NaN values somewhere, it means that the data at that location is either missing or represented incorrectly.
Natural Language Processing	In simple words, Natural Language Processing is a field which aims to make computer systems understand human speech. NLP is comprised of techniques to process, structure, categorize raw text and extract information.
ChatBot is a classic example of NLP, where sentences are first processed, cleaned and converted to machine understandable format.

NoSQL	NoSQL means Not only SQL. A NoSQL database provides a mechanism for storage and retrieval of data that is modeled in means other than the tabular relations used in relational databases. It can accommodate a wide variety of data models, including key-value, document, columnar and graph formats.
Types of NoSQL:

Column
Document
Key-Value
Graph
Multi-model
To learn more about NoSQL and its types, refer here.

Nominal Variable	Nominal variables are categorical variables having two or more categories without any kind of order to them.
For example, a column called “name of cities” with values such as Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, etc.

We can see that there is no order between the variables – viz Delhi is in no particular way higher or lower than Mumbai (unless explicitly mentioned).

Normal Distribution	
The normal distribution is the most important and most widely used distribution in statistics. It is sometimes called the bell curve, because it has a peculiar shape of a bell. Mostly, a binomial distribution is similar to normal distribution. The difference between the two is normal distribution is continuous.

standard normal distribution - statistics

Normalization	Normalization is the process of rescaling your data so that they have the same scale. Normalization is used when the attributes in our data have varying scales.
For example, if you have a variable ranging from 0 to 1 and other from 0 to 1000, you can normalize the variable, such that both are in the range 0 to 1.

Numpy	NumPy is the fundamental package for scientific computing with Python. It contains among other things:
a powerful N-dimensional array object
sophisticated (broadcasting) functions
tools for integrating C/C++ and Fortran code
useful linear algebra, Fourier transform, and random number capabilities
Besides its obvious scientific uses, NumPy can also be used as an efficient multi-dimensional container of generic data. Arbitrary data-types can be defined. This allows NumPy to seamlessly and speedily integrate with a wide variety of databases.

[/su_table]

 

O
[su_table]

 

Word
Description
One Hot Encoding
One Hot encoding is done usually in the preprocessing step. It is a technique which converts categorical variables to numerical in an interpretable format. In this we create a Boolean column for each category of the variable.
For example, if the data is

Sr. No.	Name
1	Vivek
2	Akshat
3	Arshad
This is converted as

Sr. No.	Vivek	Akshat	Arshad
1	1	0	0
2	0	1	0
3	0	0	1
One Shot Learning	It is a machine learning approach where the model is trained on a single example. One-shot Learning is generally used for object classification. This is performed to design effective classifiers from a single training example.
Oozie	Apache Oozie is the tool in which all sort of programs can be pipelined in a desired order to work in Hadoop’s distributed environment. Oozie also provides a mechanism to run the job at a given schedule.
It consists of two parts:

Workflow engine: Responsibility of a workflow engine is to store and run workflows composed of Hadoop jobs e.g., MapReduce, Pig, Hive.
Coordinator engine: It runs workflow jobs based on predefined schedules and availability of data.
Features of Oozie:

Oozie has client API and command line interface which can be used to launch, control and monitor job from Java application.
Using its Web Service APIs one can control jobs from anywhere.
Oozie has provision to execute jobs which are scheduled to run periodically.
Ordinal Variable	Ordinal variables are those variables which have discrete values but has some order involved. Refer here.
Outlier	Outlier is an observation that appears far away and diverges from an overall pattern in a sample.
Outlier - statistics

Overfitting	A model is said to overfit when it performs well on the train dataset but fails on the test set. This happens when the model is too sensitive and captures random patterns which are present only in the training dataset. There are two methods to overcome overfitting:
Reduce the model complexity
Regularization
[/su_table]

 

P
[su_table]

 

Word
Description
Pandas	Pandas is an open source, high-performance, easy-to-use data structure and data analysis library for the Python programming language. Some of the highlights of Pandas are:
A fast and efficient DataFrame object for data manipulation with integrated indexing.
Tools for reading and writing data between in-memory data structures and different formats: CSV and text files, Microsoft Excel, SQL databases, and the fast HDF5 format.
Flexible reshaping and pivoting of data sets.
Columns can be inserted and deleted from data structures for size mutability.
High performance merging and joining of data sets.
For more information on Pandas, you can refer here.

Parameters	Parameters are a set of measurable factors that define a system. For machine learning models, model parameters are internal variables whose values can be determined from the data.
For instance, the weights in linear and logistic regression fall under the category of parameters.

Pattern Recognition	Pattern recognition is a branch of machine learning that focuses on the recognition of patterns and regularities in data. Classification is an example of pattern recognition wherein each input value is assigned one of a given set of classes.  
In computer vision, supervised pattern recognition techniques are used for optical character recognition (OCR), face detection, face recognition, object detection, and object classification.



Pie Chart	A pie chart is a circular statistical graphic which is divided into slices to illustrate numerical proportion. The arc length of each slice, is proportional to the quantity it represents. Let us understand it with an example:


This represents a pie graph showing the results of an exam. Each grade is denoted by a “slice”. The total of the percentages is equal to 100. The total of the arc measures is equal to 360 degrees. So 12% students got A grade, 29% got B, and so on.

Pig	Pig is a high level scripting language that is used with Apache Hadoop. Pig enables data workers to write complex data transformations without knowing Java. Pig is complete, so one can do all required data manipulations in Apache Hadoop with Pig. Through the User Defined Functions(UDF) facility in Pig, Pig can invoke code in many languages like JRuby, Jython and Java.
Key features of Pig:

It is able to store data at any point during a pipeline.
It declares execution plans.
Supports pipeline splits, thus allowing workflows to proceed along DAGs instead of strictly sequential pipelines.
Users can create their own functions to do special-purpose processing.
To read further on Pig, refer here.

Polynomial Regression
In this technique, a curve fits into the data points. In a polynomial regression equation, the power of the independent variable is greater than 1. Although higher degree polynomials give lower error, they might also result in over-fitting.




Pre-trained Model
A pre-trained model is a model created by someone else to solve a similar problem. Instead of building a model from scratch to solve a similar problem, you use the model trained on other problem as a starting point.
For example, if you want to build a self learning car. You can spend years to build a decent image recognition algorithm from scratch or you can take inception model (a pre-trained model) from Google which was built on ImageNet data to identify images in those pictures.

For more information regarding Pre-trained model and their usages, you can refer here.



Precision and Recall
Precision can be measured as of the total actual positive cases, how many positives were predicted correctly.
It can be represented as:

Precision = TP / (TP + FP)

Whereas recall is described as the measured of how many of the positive predictions were correct.

It can be represented as:

Recall = TP / (TP + FN)



Predictor Variable	Predictor variable is used to make a prediction for dependent variables.
Principal Component Analysis (PCA)	Principal component analysis (PCA) is an approach to factor analysis that considers the total variance in the data, and transforms the original variables into a smaller set of linear combinations. PCA is sensitive to outliers; they should be removed.
It is a statistical procedure that uses an orthogonal transformation to convert a set of observations of possibly correlated variables into a set of values of linearly uncorrelated variables called principal components.

PCA is mostly used as a tool in exploratory data analysis and for making predictive models. It’s often used to visualize genetic distance and relatedness between populations.

P-Value	P-value is the value of probability of getting a result equal to or greater than the observed value, when the null hypothesis is true.
Python	Python is an open source programming language, widely used for various applications, such as general purpose programming, data science and machine learning. Usually preferred by beginners in these fields because of the following major advantages:
Easy to learn.
High-level language
Broadly used and supported
To learn python from scratch, you can follow this article.

PyTorch	PyTorch is an open source machine learning library for python, based on Torch. It is built to provide flexibility as a deep learning development platform. Here are a few reasons for which PyTorch is extensively used :
Easy to use API
Python support
Dynamic computation graphs
[/su_table]

 

Q
[su_table]

Word
Description
Quartile	
Quartile divides a series into 4 equal parts. For any series, there are 4 quartiles denoted by Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4. These are known as First Quartile , Second Quartile and so on.

For example, the diagram below shows the health score of a patient from range 0 to 60. Quartiles divide the population into 4 groups.

Quartiles - statitstics

[/su_table]

 

R
[su_table]

 

Word
Description
 R	R is an open-source programming language and a software environment for statistical computing, machine learning, and data visualization.
Features of R:

It is platform independent, so it is compatible with multiple operating systems
R has a very strong and consistent online community support
The graphical capabilities of R are awesome
There is abundance of literature to learn R
 Range	Range is the difference between the highest and the lowest value of the population. It is used to measure the spread of the data.Let us understand it with an example:
Suppose we have a dataset having 10 data points, listed below:

4,5,2,8,4,7,6,4,6,3

So, first of all we will arrange these data points in ascending order:

2,3,4,4,4,5,6,6,7,8

Now the range of this set is the difference between the highest(8) and the lowest(2) value.

Range = 8-2 = 6

Recommendation Engine	Generally people tend to buy products recommended to them by their friends or the people they trust. Nowadays in the digital age, any online shop you visit utilizes some sort of recommendation engine. Recommendation engines basically are data filtering tools that make use of algorithms and data to recommend the most relevant items to a particular user. If we can recommend items to a customer based on their needs and interests, it will create a positive effect on the user experience and they will visit more frequently. There are few types of recommendation engines:
Content based filtering
Collaborative filtering
User-User collaborative filtering
Item-Item collaborative filtering
Hybrid recommendation systems
Regression	
It is supervised learning method where the output variable is a real value, such as “amount” or “weight”.

Example of Regression: Linear Regression, Ridge Regression, Lasso Regression

Regression Spline	Regression Splines is a non-linear approach that uses a combination of linear/polynomial functions to fit the data. In this technique, instead of building one model for the entire dataset, it is divided into multiple bins and a separate model is built on each bin.
Read more about this topic here.

Regularization	Regularization is a technique used to solve the overfitting problem in statistical models. In machine learning, regularization penalizes the coefficients such that the model generalize better. We have different types of regression techniques which uses regularization such as Ridge regression and lasso regression.
 

 Reinforcement Learning	
 It is an example of machine learning where the machine is trained to take specific decisions based on the business requirement with the sole motto to maximize efficiency (performance). The idea involved in reinforcement learning is: The machine/ software agent trains itself on a continual basis based on the environment it is exposed to, and applies it’s enriched knowledge to solve business problems. This continual learning process ensures less involvement of human expertise which in turn saves a lot of time!

Important Note: There is a subtle difference between Supervised Learning and Reinforcement Learning (RL). RL essentially involves learning by interacting with an environment. An RL agent learns from its past experience, rather from its continual trial and error learning process as against supervised learning where an external supervisor  provides examples.

A good example to understand the difference is self driving cars. Self driving cars use Reinforcement learning to make decisions continuously like which route to take, what speed to drive on, are some of the questions which are decided after interacting with the environment. A simple manifestation for supervised learning would be to predict the total fare of a cab at the end of a journey.

Residual	Residual of a value is the difference between the observed value and the predicted value of the quantity of interest. Using the residual values, you can create residual plots which are useful for understanding the model.
Response Variable	Response variable (or dependent variable) is that variable whose variation depends on other variables.
Ridge Regression	
Ridge regression performs ‘L2 regularization‘, i.e. it adds a factor of sum of squares of coefficients in the optimization objective. Thus, ridge regression optimizes the following:

Objective = RSS + α * (sum of square of coefficients)
Here, α (alpha) is the parameter which balances the amount of emphasis given to minimizing RSS vs minimizing sum of squares of coefficients. α can take various values:

α = 0:
The objective becomes same as simple linear regression.
We’ll get the same coefficients as simple linear regression.
α = ∞:
The coefficients will be zero. This is because of infinite weightage on square of coefficients, anything less than zero will make the objective infinite.
0 < α < ∞:
The magnitude of α will decide the weightage given to different parts of objective.
The coefficients will be somewhere between 0 and 1 for simple linear regression.
ROC-AUC	Let’s first understand what is ROC (Receiver operating characteristic) curve. If we look at the confusion matrix, we observe that for a probabilistic model, we get different value for each metric.


Hence, for each sensitivity, we get a different specificity. The two vary as follows:



The ROC curve is the plot between sensitivity and (1- specificity). (1- specificity) is also known as false positive rate and sensitivity is also known as True Positive rate. Following is the ROC curve for the case in hand.



Let’s take an example of threshold = 0.5 (refer to confusion matrix). Here is the confusion matrix :

As you can see, the sensitivity at this threshold is 99.6% and the (1-specificity) is ~60%. This coordinate becomes on point in our ROC curve. To bring this curve down to a single number, we find the area under this curve (AUC).

Note that the area of entire square is 1*1 = 1. Hence, AUC itself is the ratio under the curve and the total area.

Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)	RMSE is a measure of the differences between values predicted by a model or an estimator and the values actually observed. It is the standard deviation of the residuals. Residuals are a measure of how far from the regression line data points are. The formula for RMSE is given by:


Here,

Predicted -> value predicted by the model
Actual -> observed values
N -> Total number of observations
Rotational Invariance	In mathematics, a function defined on an inner product space is said to have rotational invariance if its value does not change when arbitrary rotations are applied to its argument. For example, the function:


is invariant under rotations of the plane around the origin, because for a rotated set of coordinates through any angle θ.

[/su_table]

 

S
[su_table]

Word
Description
Scala	Scala is a general purpose language that combines concepts of object-oriented and functional programming languages. Here are some key features of Scala
Its an object-oriented language that supports many traditional design patterns
It supports functional programming which enables it to handle distributed programming at fundamental level
It is designed to run on JVM platform that helps in directly using Java libraries
Scala can be easily implemented into existing java projects as Scala libraries can be used within Java code
It supports first-class objects and anonymous functions
 Semi-Supervised Learning	Problems where you have a large amount of input data (X) and only some of the data, is labeled (Y) are called semi-supervised learning problems.
These problems sit in between both supervised and unsupervised learning.

A good example is a photo archive where only some of the images are labeled, (e.g. dog, cat, person) and the majority are unlabeled.

Skewness	
Skewness is a measure of symmetry. A distribution, or data set, is symmetric if it looks the same to the left and right of the center point.

skewness - statistics

SMOTE	It is a Synthetic Minority Over-Sampling Technique which is an approach to the construction of classifiers from imbalanced datasets is described. The idea behind this technique is that over-sampling the minority (abnormal) class and under-sampling the majority (normal) class can achieve better classifier performance (in ROC space) than only under-sampling the majority class. This is an over-sampling approach in which the minority class is over-sampled by creating “synthetic” examples rather than by over-sampling with replacement. To read further on SMOTE, refer here.
Spatial-Temporal Reasoning	Spatial-temporal reasoning is an area of artificial intelligence which draws from the fields of computer science, cognitive science, and cognitive psychology. Spatial-temporal reasoning is the ability to mentally move objects in space and time to solve multi-step problems. Three important things about Spatial-temporal reasoning are:
It connects to mathematics at all levels, from kindergarten to calculus
It is innate in humans
Spatial-temporal reasoning abilities can be increased. This understanding of Spatial-temporal reasoning forms the foundation of Spatial-temporal Math
Standard Deviation	Standard deviation signifies how dispersed is the data. It is the square root of the variance of underlying data. Standard deviation is calculated for a population.
Standardization	Standardization (or Z-score normalization) is the process where the features are rescaled so that they’ll have the properties of a standard normal distribution with μ=0 and σ=1, where μ is the mean (average) and σ is the standard deviation from the mean. Standard scores (also called z scores) of the samples are calculated as follows:
Standard error	A standard error is the standard deviation of the sampling distribution of a statistic. The standard error is a statistical term that measures the accuracy of which a sample represents a population. In statistics, a sample mean deviates from the actual mean of a population this deviation is known as standard error.
Statistics	It is the study of the collection, analysis, interpretation, presentation, and organisation of data.
Stochastic Gradient Descent	Stochastic Gradient Descent is a type of gradient descent algorithm where we take a sample of data while computing the gradient. The update to the coefficients is performed for each training instance, rather than at the end of the batch of instances.
The learning can be much faster with stochastic gradient descent for very large training datasets and often one only need a small number of passes through the dataset to reach a good or good enough set of coefficients.

 Supervised Learning	Supervised Learning algorithm consists of a target / outcome variable (or dependent variable) which is to be predicted from a given set of predictors (independent variables). Using these set of predictors, we generate a function that map inputs to desired outputs. Like: y= f(x)
Here, The goal is to approximate the mapping function so well that when you have new input data (x) that you can predict the output variables (Y) for that data.

Examples of Supervised Learning algorithms: Regression, Decision Tree, Random Forest, KNN, Logistic Regression etc.

SVM	
It is a classification method. In this algorithm, we plot each data item as a point in n-dimensional space (where n is the number of features you have) with the value of each feature being the value of a particular coordinate.

For example, if we only have two features like Height and Hair length of an individual, we’d first plot these two variables in two-dimensional space where each point has two coordinates (these coordinates are known as Support Vectors) Now, we will find some line that splits the data between the two differently classified groups of data. This will be the line such that the distances from the closest point in each of the two groups will be farthest away.

SVM - Support Vector Machine - supervised learning

[/su_table]

 

T
[su_table]

Word
Description
TensorFlow	TensorFlow, developed by the Google Brain team, is an open source software library. It is used for building machine learning models for range of tasks in data science, mainly used for machine learning applications such as building neural networks. TensorFlow can also be used for non- machine learning tasks that require numerical computation.
Tokenization	Tokenization is the process of splitting a text string into units called tokens. The tokens may be words or a group of words. It is a crucial step in Natural Language Processing.
Torch	Torch is an open source machine learning library, based on the Lua programming language. It provides a wide range of algorithms for deep learning.
Transfer Learning	Transfer learning refers to applying a pre-trained model on a new dataset. A pre-trained model is a model created by someone to solve a problem. This model can be applied to solve a similar problem with similar data.
Here you can check some of the most widely used pre-trained models.

True Negative	These are the points which are actually false and we have predicted them false. For example, consider an example where we have to predict whether the loan will be approved or not. Y represents that loan will be approved, whereas N represents that loan will not be approved. So, here the True negative will be the number of classes which are actually N and we have predicted them N as well.
True Positive	These are the points which are actually true and we have predicted them true. For example, consider an example where we have to predict whether the loan will be approved or not. Y represents that loan will be approved, whereas N represents that loan will not be approved. So, here the True positive will be the number of classes which are actually Y and we have predicted them Y as well.
Type I error	The decision to reject the null hypothesis could be incorrect, it is known as Type I error.
Type I error - statistics

Type II error	The decision to retain the null hypothesis could be incorrect, it is know as Type II error.
Type II error - statistics

T-Test	T-test is used to compare two population by finding the difference of their population means. For more, refer here.
[/su_table]

 

U
[su_table]

Word
Description
Underfitting	Underfitting occurs when a statistical model or machine learning algorithm cannot capture the underlying trend of the data. It refers to a model that can neither model on the training data nor generalize to new data. An underfit model is not a suitable model as it will have poor performance on the training data.
Univariate Analysis	Univariate analysis is comparing and analyzing the dependency of a single predictor and a response variable
 Unsupervised Learning	In Unsupervised Learning algorithm, we do not have any target or outcome variable to predict/estimate. The goal of unsupervised learning is to model the underlying structure or distribution in the data in order to learn more about the data or segment into different groups based on their attributes.Examples of Unsupervised Learning algorithm: Apriori algorithm, K-means.
[/su_table]

 

V
[su_table]

Word
Description
Variance	
Variance is used to measure the spread of given set of numbers and calculated by the average of squared distances from the mean

Let’s take an example, suppose the set of numbers we have is (600, 470, 170, 430, 300)
To Calculate:
1) Find the Mean of set of numbers, which is (600 + 470 + 170 + 430 + 300) / 5 = 394
2) Subtract the mean from each value which is (206, 76, -334, 36, -94)
3) Square each deviation from the mean which is (42436, 5776, 50176, 1296, 8836)
4) Find the Sum of Squares which is 108520
5) Divide by total number of items (numbers) which is 21704

[/su_table]




Z
[su_table]

 

 

Word
Description
Z-test	Z-test determines to what extent a data point is away from the mean of the data set, in standard deviation. For example:
Principal at a certain school claims that the students in his school are above average intelligence. A random sample of thirty students has a mean IQ score of 112. The mean population IQ is 100 with a standard deviation of 15. Is there sufficient evidence to support the principal’s claim?

So we can make use of z-test to test the claims made by the principal. Steps to perform z-test:

Stating null hypothesis and alternate hypothesis.
State the alpha level. If you don’t have an alpha level, use 5% (0.05).
Find the rejection region area (given by your alpha level above) from the z-table. An area of .05 is equal to a z-score of 1.645.
Find the test statistics using this formula:


Here,

x ̅is the sample mean
σ is population standard deviation
n is sample size
μ is the population mean
If the test statistic is greater than the z-score of rejection area, reject the null hypothesis. If it’s less than that z-score, you cannot reject the null hypothesis.

To get a better understanding of the topic, refer here.

Zookeeper	ZooKeeper is a software project of the Apache Software Foundation. It is an open source file application program interface (API) that allows distributed processes in large systems to synchronize with each other so that all clients making requests receive consistent data.
